STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF THIS STUDY
This research will advance previous studies by examining the impact of cognitive-behavioural therapy for insomnia (CBTi) on cannabis use frequency as a primary outcome.
This study uses a randomised controlled trial design to determine the extent to which CBTi impacts cannabis use frequency and may be useful in the treatment of individuals with frequent cannabis use.
The trial collects multiple validated outcomes and incorporates both subjective and objective measures, including daily diaries, actigraphy and polysomnography.
Eligibility criteria may result in a homogenous sample that limits the generalisability to the broader population of individuals with frequent cannabis use and insomnia.
Introduction
Cannabis use has more than doubled in adults over the past two decades as a growing number of states have legalised medical and/or recreational cannabis use.14 Prevalence rates of regular cannabis use and cannabis use disorder have similarly increased during this time and have been linked to numerous adverse outcomes, including other substance misuse, neurocognitive problems, increased risk of psychosis and greater sleep problems.515 Yet, fewer than one in 10 individuals with frequent cannabis use, defined as using cannabis three or more days per week,16 receive specialised cannabis-focused treatment.17 Innovative strategies are critically needed to improve the health and functioning of this population.
Insomnia is a potential target for reducing cannabis use. In a cohort study of 800 adults obtaining medical cannabis certification, 80% of respondents reported that managing insomnia was a primary motivator for cannabis use yet more than half reported insomnia in the past 30 days, and despite regular cannabis use, 25% reported insomnia almost nightly. Moreover, nearly two-thirds of the sample indicated that insomnia worsened during prior experiences of cannabis withdrawal.18 Individuals with frequent cannabis use also identify insomnia as a barrier to cannabis reduction or cessation.19 20
Treatment of insomnia among individuals with frequent cannabis use
Efforts to target insomnia in patients with frequent cannabis use are not yet widespread. Cognitive-behavioural therapy for insomnia (CBTi), a multicomponent intervention that targets behavioural and cognitive factors that contribute to chronic sleep disturbances, has a robust evidence base and is the first-line treatment for chronic insomnia.21 CBTi benefits 70%–80% of individuals with chronic insomnia,2224 nearly 50% achieve remission from insomnia post-treatment25 26 and initial treatment gains are well maintained over time, with follow-up periods up to 3 years.2729 The efficacy and safety of CBTi have been documented in numerous controlled trials of patients with insomnia,22 23 including those living with co-occurring conditions, such as depression, anxiety, alcohol use disorder,30 31 chronic pain32 33 and dependence on hypnotics for insomnia.34
To date, only a few small-scale clinical trials have evaluated CBTi among individuals actively using cannabis.35 36 In a randomised controlled pilot trial, we assessed the acceptability and feasibility of telemedicine-delivered CBTi tailored for adults with frequent cannabis use (CBTi-CB) and compared its preliminary short-term efficacy with a telemedicine-delivered psychoeducational control condition, referred to as sleep hygiene education (SHE). We found significant short-term improvements in insomnia symptoms and reductions in cannabis use around bedtime in the CBTi-CB versus SHE condition, although the study was not powered to evaluate efficacy over multiple outcomes and follow-ups.37 This study is the first to demonstrate the possible benefits of CBTi-CB to target insomnia for improving overall functioning and reducing cannabis use as a sleep aid. However, larger-scale studies are required to evaluate the effects of CBTi-CB on sleep- and cannabis-related outcomes over time.
Mechanisms underlying associations between insomnia and frequent cannabis use
The specific mechanisms underlying the association between insomnia and frequent cannabis use are poorly understood. To date, these associations have been explored with cross-sectional, observational studies using polysomnography (PSG), which have yielded mixed findings.3842 In general, the evidence suggests that acute intake of cannabis before bed subjectively facilitates sleep onset and consolidates sleep, but that sleep latency and wakefulness during the night are generally increased at higher doses.36 Additional data suggest that chronic cannabis intake reduces deep slow-wave sleep and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep.4345 Objective sleep findings are variable across studies owing to small, predominantly male samples with limited diversity, methodological differences in PSG procedures, lack of standardisation of cannabis content and dosing and limited characterisation of cannabis use history or use of other substances. Nonetheless, studies consistently show that withdrawal from frequent cannabis use elicits subjective and objective sleep disturbances.20 40 41 Individuals experiencing cannabis withdrawal symptoms also report difficulty falling asleep and worse sleep quality and objective PSG shows reduced total sleep time and sleep efficiency, and increased night-time wakefulness compared with substance-free controls.39 40
No studies have evaluated fundamental sleep mechanisms in adults with frequent cannabis use, although evidence from individuals who use other substances suggests these systems may be disrupted. Sleep is regulated by two fundamentally distinct but interacting systems: a circadian process C and a homeostatically driven process S.46 Process C reflects the intrinsic biological clock located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei of the anterior hypothalamus, which promotes wakefulness during the day and regulates, among other things, sleep timing. Process S reflects ‘sleep drive’, which increases with wakefulness during the day and dissipates during sleep. Process S is most commonly evaluated by EEG slow wave activity (SWA, EEG frequencies 0.5–4.0 Hz) through measurement of SWA power (measured in µV2/Hz) and SWA dynamics across non-REM (NREM) sleep periods (measured by linear regressions). The interaction of process C and process S determines the daily course of sleepiness, alertness, cognitive performance and mood.47 48 We have shown that individuals with alcohol use disorder have a blunted homeostatic sleep drive in response to an experimental sleep challenge compared with controls, evidenced by lower SWA power during the first NREM period and a slower dissipation of SWA across the night.49 We propose to apply these laboratory-based techniques to individuals with frequent cannabis use and evaluate associations between homeostatic sleep drive and clinical outcomes.
CBTi-CB may theoretically target homeostatic dysfunction among individuals with frequent cannabis use. Although studies are limited in number (and exclude individuals with more extensive substance use), the available data suggest that CBTi may improve homeostatic sleep drive in individuals with insomnia. Among nine individuals with chronic insomnia (mean age 47±9.7 years, seven women), relative to baseline, SWA power increased and SWA dissipated at a faster rate after 8 weeks of CBTi.50 In secondary data analysis of a randomised controlled trial, Krystal and Edinger51 found that CBTi (n=16) led to a more rapid dissipation of SWA power across NREM sleep periods compared with a placebo control condition (n=14). Among CBTi participants, an increase in peak SWA power in the first period and in the steepness of decline of SWA across NREM periods were positively associated with treatment response. The current study proposes to extend these findings to individuals with frequent cannabis use and insomnia and determine the extent to which changes in sleep homeostasis mediate changes in key clinical outcomes (ie, cannabis use).
Study objectives
Aim 1
To compare the efficacy of telemedicine-delivered CBT for insomnia (CBTi-CB) with SHE on the frequency of cannabis use in adults with frequent cannabis use and chronic insomnia.
Hypothesis 1
We hypothesise that participants randomised to CBTi-CB will show a greater reduction in the frequency of cannabis use (primary outcome), as measured by Timeline Follow Back (TLFB), and cannabis use for insomnia compared with those assigned to SHE at post-treatment. Additionally, we expect this difference will be sustained at 3-month and 6-month follow-up.
Aim 2
To compare the efficacy of CBTi-CB with SHE on insomnia and daytime functioning.
Hypothesis 2
We hypothesise that insomnia, as measured by the Insomnia Severity Index (ISI),52 and daytime functioning, as measured by the 12-item Short-Form Health Survey (SF-12),53 will show greater improvement at post-treatment and at the 3-month and 6-month follow-ups for participants randomised to CBTi-CB versus SHE.
Secondary aim
To determine the impact of CBTi-CB on a potential mechanism underlying insomnia and cannabis use (homeostatic sleep drive). We will also examine the extent to which changes in cannabis use are mediated by the effects of CBTi-CB versus SHE on the homeostatic sleep system.
Hypothesis 3
We hypothesise that CBTi-CB participants will show greater increases in homeostatic sleep drive, as measured by change in the rate of SWA dissipation over the course of the night, at post-treatment than SHE participants.
Hypothesis 4
Changes in homeostatic sleep drive will mediate changes in frequency of cannabis use at post-treatment and 3-month and 6-month follow-up.
Methods and design
Study design and setting
This is a randomised controlled, single-site, single-blind, parallel clinical trial in which 200 adults with frequent cannabis use and chronic insomnia are randomised to six sessions of individual telemedicine-delivered CBTi-CB (n=100) or SHE (n=100). The study began on 15 September 2022 and will end on 31 July 2027. Participants complete outcome assessments at baseline, post-treatment and 3-month and 6-month post-treatment follow-up. The primary clinical outcomes are the frequency of cannabis use assessed by the interviewer-administered TLFB,54 post-treatment scores on the ISI52 and the SF-12 Mental Component Score (MCS-12).55 PSG is conducted pre-treatment and post-treatment to measure the change in homeostatic sleep drive. Study flow is shown in figure 1.
Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) flow diagram. PSG, polysomnography; REDCap, Research Electronic Data Capture.
The study protocol has received approval from the Institutional Review Board of the University of Michigan Medical School (IRBMED) and any future amendments to the study protocol will be reviewed by IRBMED. All participants provided written informed consent.
Patient and public involvement
Patients or the public were not involved in the design, conduct, reporting or dissemination plans of our research.
Procedures
Participants are primarily recruited from the community using ads on social media platforms and must meet the eligibility criteria outlined in table 1. Additional recruitment methods include advertising at local dispensaries, clinics and pharmacies.
Participant eligibility criteria
21 years of age and older, the age required to obtain full legal access to cannabis in Michigan.
Self-reported chronic insomnia (night-time symptoms of difficulty initiating and/or maintaining sleep and/or early morning awakenings on ≥3 nights for ≥3 months with daytime impairment), consistent with Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition diagnosis of insomnia disorder.
Insomnia Severity Index score ≥11, indicative of at least ‘mild’ insomnia.
A positive urine drug screen for cannabis.
Self-reported use of cannabis at least three times weekly for the past month.
Stable residence (eg, stable sleep arrangements), consistent access to Wi-Fi and ability to travel to Ann Arbor for sleep laboratory assessments.
Individuals who do not understand English (read and spoken).
Individuals judged unable to provide informed consent (eg, due to intoxication or mental incompetence)
Diagnosis of, or high suspicion for, sleep disorders other than insomnia.
Lifetime diagnosis of psychotic disorder or bipolar disorder; current post-traumatic stress disorder that directly interferes with sleep.
Terminal or progressive physical illness (eg, cancer), neurological degenerative disease (eg, dementia).
Use of medications known to have initiated their insomnia (eg, steroids).
Previous receipt of CBTi.
Self-reported pregnancy.
Self-reported regular work schedule of rotating or night (third) shift work.
Other conditions and situations, medical or otherwise, that preclude meaningful and/or safe participation in CBT/SHE and study procedures.
CBT, cognitive-behavioural therapy; CBTi, cognitive-behavioural therapy for insomnia; SHE, sleep hygiene education.
Volunteers are initially screened using an online Qualtrics survey that includes questions about insomnia severity and cannabis use frequency. The ISI52 assesses for clinically significant levels of insomnia (ISI score ≥11) and frequent cannabis use is defined as using cannabis at least three times per week for the past month (with usage below that threshold deemed as ineligible). Minimally eligible volunteers proceed to sign an informed consent form (ICF) (online supplemental material), with trained research staff, and then complete the stage II screening that includes a clinical interview, with the Structured Clinical Interview for Sleep Disorders56 and Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview57 to assess for exclusionary medical/mental health conditions (outlined in table 1), rule out other disqualifying clinical sleep disorders and confirm a diagnosis of chronic insomnia according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Text Revision.58 Eligible participants undergo one night of in-laboratory PSG to rule out clinical sleep disorders per the International Classification of Sleep Disorders, Third Edition, Text Revision59 and to collect baseline PSG data. Any participant with a PSG suggestive of a clinical sleep disorder other than insomnia is excluded from the RCT.
Participants who remain eligible after the PSG are emailed a link from Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) to complete an electronic daily sleep/cannabis use diary60 and are loaned an activity monitor (FitBit Charge 5) to maintain for 7 days and complete baseline self-report assessments and an interviewer-administered TLFB.61 The baseline self-report assessments include a second administration of the ISI. The ISI has a retrospective 2-week timeframe and is collected for the first time on the Qualtrics screening survey as an initial eligibility measure to identify probable chronic insomnia disorder (ISI ≥11), consistent with recommendations by Morin et al.62 Once chronic insomnia disorder is confirmed at the clinical interview, participants maintain a minimum of 7 days (and up to 14 days) of sleep diary information before initiating therapy sessions for their assigned condition. The elapsed time between completion of the Qualtrics screening survey and the 7-day sleep diary always exceeds 14 days, so the ISI is re-administered with the other baseline assessments, and this score is used as the baseline insomnia severity outcome.
Following baseline, participants are randomised according to procedures outlined below (see ‘Randomisation and blinding’ section) and scheduled for six sessions of CBTi-CB or SHE over the course of 6 weeks.
The follow-up period begins immediately after completion of treatment when participants complete post-treatment self-report assessments, interviewer-administered TLFB, one additional night of PSG and 7 days of sleep/cannabis use diaries and activity monitoring. At 3-month and 6-month post-treatment, participants again complete self-report assessments and 7 days of sleep/cannabis use diaries and activity monitoring.
Once enrolled, the study team uses several retention strategies, based on successful previous studies,37 which include (1) providing participants with multiple reminder phone calls/texts before appointments, (2) sending follow-up emails to maintain participant engagement and (3) offering participants financial compensation for completion of all non-therapy study activities.
Throughout participation, any adverse events (AEs), both solicited and spontaneously reported, are recorded and reported to the Principal Investigator, who has ultimate responsibility to determine severity and relatedness of any events. Any events are then reported to IRBMED and National Institutes of Health (NIH), following reporting guidelines based on severity and relatedness of AEs.
Sleep and cannabis use diary procedures
Participants complete the consensus sleep diary60 each morning for 7 days at baseline, post-treatment, at the 3-month and 6-month follow-ups and daily during the 6-week treatment period. The sleep diary data are collected daily via the secure web-based platform REDCap. Consistent with the consensus sleep diary,60 participants provide subjective information on the following: bedtime, lights out time, sleep onset latency, total number of nocturnal awakenings, duration of nocturnal awakenings, wake time, rise time, objective rating of sleep quality and use of prescription and over-the-counter sleep aids. An additional question about cannabis use on the previous day (including timing and method) is used to monitor active cannabis use behaviours.
Polysomnography procedures
Participants complete one night of in-laboratory PSG at baseline and at post-treatment. For PSG studies, EEG is recorded from left and right frontal, central and occipital electrode sites (F3 and F4; C3 and C4; O1 and O2), placed according to the International 10-20 System63; monopolar EOG recordings are made from the supraorbital and infraorbital ridges of the eyes and EMG is recorded from a bipolar chin-cheek montage. Electrophysiological signals are acquired and analysed on Compumedics Grael HD-PSG/EEG Diagnostic Amplifier Systems using Compumedics Profusion SLEEP4 Online Acquisition and Analysis Software (Compumedics USA, Charlotte, North Carolina, USA). Data are digitised at 256 Hz and stored off-line for visual stage scoring by a trained sleep technician blinded to treatment condition.
Randomisation and blinding
Randomisation is performed by the study statistician using block randomisation, stratified by biological sex and age (≤40 or >40 years of age). To ensure non-predictability of assignments, participants are randomised in block sizes of either 4 or 6, with equal probability, which also accommodates the possibility of some small strata. Allocation to treatment condition is conducted only after all study eligibility criteria have been met. Randomisation allocates participants in a 1:1 ratio to either CBTi-CB or SHE.
Participants and research staff assessing outcomes are blind to treatment condition; only the research coordinator and research therapists are aware of treatment assignment. PSG records are similarly analysed agnostic to treatment condition. The same study therapists deliver both treatment conditions and are subsequently not blind to CBTi-CB versus SHE; however, the study uses rigorous treatment fidelity procedures (see below) to minimise the risk of bias.
Interventions
Participants are randomised to six sessions of telemedicine-delivered CBTi-CB or SHE. Both interventions are designed to be delivered weekly over the course of six sessions, with each session between 30 and 60 min in duration, delivered remotely by therapists trained on the study interventions. These interventions have been described previously.37 Session content is outlined in tables2 3.
Telemedicine-delivered CBTi-CB
CBTi-CB, cognitive-behavioural therapy for insomnia with frequent cannabis use.
Telemedicine-delivered sleep hygiene education
Treatment monitoring and therapist fidelity
Participant treatment adherence is assessed by tracking session attendance and reschedules/cancellations. Additionally, participants are given a content comprehension measure following the first therapy session and at the final treatment visit session.
A random sample of 25% of treatment session videos are reviewed by the study therapist supervisor (DAC). Treatment session recordings are audio-only and participants are not required to allow recordings to be part of this trial. Each of these videos is scored according to a Treatment Fidelity and Therapist Competence measure designed for this study, which includes assessments of the degree to which critical session topics are covered and therapist competence in content delivery. In addition, the therapist is assessed by the participant’s completion of the Working Alliance Inventory64 and Therapist Evaluation Questionnaire.65 Protocol deviations are remediated and the clinical supervisor provides oversight of therapists throughout the project. Percentages of treatment integrity/violations are calculated, with >90% of coded therapy sessions correctly delivered as the benchmark for success.
Treatment is modified or discontinued if AEs occur. During the trial, any necessary treatment for co-occurring medical, mental health or substance use disorder conditions is permitted.
Primary outcome measures
Cannabis use (aim 1). Changes in frequency of cannabis use will be evaluated over the past 30 days using the TLFB.54 This interviewer-administered calendar-guided instrument is widely considered the ‘gold standard’ tool for assessing daily substance use and will be used to measure the frequency of use of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-containing cannabis products across all modalities (ie, flower, wax, concentrates, THC e-cigarettes and edibles) guided by pictorial aids. During the interview, participants are asked to specify motivations behind cannabis use, including recreational use, medicinal use, sleep aid or use for other reasons. In addition, we will collect data on alcohol and other substance use during the interview. The primary outcome is frequency of cannabis use per day across all modalities. Participants obtain cannabis from a variety of sources and thus dose assessments using retrospective recall would not be reliable. We therefore chose frequency as our primary outcome, which is also recommended by expert consensus.66
Insomnia (aim 2). Changes in insomnia severity from baseline to post-treatment are assessed with the 7-item ISI,52 a self-administered assessment of global insomnia severity over the past 2 weeks that ranges in score from 0 to 28, with higher scores indicating more severe insomnia symptoms (0–7 no clinical insomnia, 8–14 mild insomnia severity, 15–22 moderate insomnia severity, 23–28 severe insomnia severity). The primary outcome is ISI total score.
Daytime functioning (aim 2). The SF-1253 is a short-form quality of life measure derived from the Medical Outcomes Study 36-Item Short-Form Health Survey. The primary outcome is the MCS-12, which ranges from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating better health.
Secondary outcome measures
EEG delta activity (secondary aim). EEG delta activity is evaluated with a power spectral analysis (PSA) algorithm. PSA generates power (area under the curve) in five EEG frequency bands: delta (0.5 to <4 Hz), theta (4 to <8 Hz), alpha (8 to <12 Hz), sigma (12 to <16 Hz), beta (16–32 Hz) and gamma (>32 Hz), expressed in µV2. Power values are averaged across 30 s epochs for each frequency band, generating data segments in identical epoch lengths to the stage-score data.67 Power values are then sorted by sleep stage to evaluate the distribution of EEG frequencies within and across successive REM and NREM periods.68 69 The primary outcome is change in the rate of dissipation of NREM sleep SWA over the course of the night (measured with the best-fit slope based on exponential regressions), but we will additionally evaluate change in SWA power in the first NREM period and averaged across the night.
Data management and analysis
Data collection and management
The Project Coordinator directly oversees the day-to-day data collection and quality assurance activities. Participant surveys are entered into a REDCap database by participants and a study team member completes regular checks for completeness, accuracy and out-of-range values. Timing of assessments and intervention throughout study enrolment are outlined in online supplemental table S1.
Data cleaning is conducted throughout the data collection period to ensure the production of a final dataset for analysis at the end of data collection. The raw data files and SAS datasets will remain secured throughout the study, and data are accessed via a shared, secure server located at the University of Michigan. Actigraphy and PSG data are stored in separate proprietary databases associated with the systems being used and are stored absent of any identifiable information. Routine data backups are part of this process.
De-identified trial data are uploaded into the NIMH Data Archive biannually, making the data accessible to other researchers interested in the treatment of sleep disorders and/or cannabis use. Trial results will be communicated via presentations at national scientific meetings, publication in peer-reviewed journals and dissemination of aggregate data to local clinics.
Data and safety monitoring plan
A Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) reviews study data and monitors participant safety on an annual basis; DSMB members are independent of the study team and of the study sponsor, the NIH. A charter was created and approved by the DSMB and submitted to the IRB. The DSMB meets annually to review study progress and to determine if there are safety concerns that require amendments to the study protocol and/or early study termination. There is no anticipated harm to participants from study participation, so no plan for ancillary care has been made.
Statistical considerations and analysis plan
We will use an ‘intention-to-treat’ approach, and all hypothesis testing will use two-sided tests (α=0.05). The key inferential target will be estimating the effect of CBTi-CB, relative to SHE, with regard to cannabis use frequency, insomnia severity and quality of life measures. We will also analyse whether homeostatic sleep drive mediates any treatment effects identified. Prior to model fitting, we will conduct graphical and descriptive analysis of the outcomes. The assumptions of our analyses will be scrutinised and models will be modified as appropriate.
To minimise missing data, we make every effort to gather follow-up information from all participants using strategies that have proved successful in our prior research. First, we will examine mechanisms of missingness, with particular emphasis on whether the missing at random (MAR) assumption—which is not statistically checkable—is plausible. If we conclude it is, then we will use multiple imputation by chained equations (MICE)70 to impute missing data, providing some increase to statistical power. If we conclude that the data are not MAR, then we will consider alternatives to MICE. For example, we may conduct sensitivity analyses using pattern mixture models71 or incorporate offsets into MICE,72 which are both ways to handle certain types of missingness patterns that violate MAR.
Our unadjusted analysis will focus on two-sample comparisons between treatment groups. For example, we will calculate pre/post differences (change scores) and compare treatment groups on the average change, recognising that this unadjusted analysis may be susceptible to regression to the mean if there are between-group imbalances in the baseline outcomes.
The proper way to account for this potential regression to the mean arising from baseline differences between treatment groups in the outcomes is to control for baseline outcomes and model between-group differences in the follow-up outcomes (eg, using regression-based approaches, effectively equivalent to analysis of covariance).73 As all of the outcomes are numeric, our initial specification will be linear regression, although this specification will be scrutinised as dictated by our examination of model diagnostics. When jointly analysing multiple follow-ups in a single model, we will account for the within-person clustering using random effects and will incorporate group-by-time interactions,74 allowing us to estimate separate treatment effects at each follow-up time point and providing a framework for testing whether the treatment effect varies over time. All models will be adjusted for the randomisation strata, since failure to do so can damage inference and sacrifice power.75 76 The initial random effects structure will be compound symmetry (ie, a single random intercept for each person), but more general correlation structures (eg, autoregressive) will be considered, if needed; alternatives to normally distributed errors will be considered as needed.
Primary outcome analyses
Aim 1: to compare the efficacy of telemedicine-delivered CBT for insomnia with sleep hygiene education on the frequency of cannabis use in adults with frequent cannabis use and chronic insomnia
This effect will be estimated by the intervention group indicator in the above-described model, with separate intervention effects estimated at each follow-up captured by the group-by-time interactions. We hypothesise a significant intervention effect at follow-up, with no significant changes in the effects at 3 and 6 months.
Aim 2: to compare the efficacy of CBTi-CB with SHE on insomnia and daytime functioning
Analogous to the above, this effect will be estimated by the coefficient for the intervention group indicator, in models where the outcomes are (a) the ISI total score (insomnia) and (b) the SF-12 MCS-12 (daytime functioning). Similarly, we hypothesise a significant intervention effect at post-treatment, with no significant changes in that effect at 3 and 6 months.
Secondary aim: to determine the impact of CBTi-CB on a potential mechanism underlying insomnia and cannabis use (homeostatic sleep drive). We will also examine the extent to which changes in cannabis use are mediated by the effects of CBTi-CB versus SHE on the homeostatic sleep system
We will first explore this hypothesis by treating the slope of SWA dissipation across NREM periods (primary sleep homeostasis measure) as an outcome, using the same approach described for aims 1 and 2, and estimating treatment effects. To more formally evaluate its role as a mediator, we will use the counterfactual mediation framework developed by Imai et al.77 The approach to mediation analysis developed by Imai et al is not as susceptible to bias due to model misspecification and design limitations, and limitations to the classes of models accommodated as classical approaches (eg, the linear structural model of Baron and Kenny).78 We will use the R package mediation,79 which accommodates a variety of distributional families. We will initially assume linear General Linear Mixed Models for both the mediator and the outcome.
Sample size considerations and detectable effect size
The target sample size for this study is 200 participants, with 100 participants allocated to each condition, providing adequate power to address the primary study aims. In the power analysis, we included a 20% loss to follow-up (ie, n=80 per group in the final analysis), which is conservative given that we had a much higher retention rate in our R34 study (86%).37 In addition, we only analyse the power to detect intervention effects at a single follow-up, which does not account for potential power gains from data imputation or from borrowing information across time points to lower the SE of the treatment effect estimate. Because our outcomes are numeric, and the effects are estimated using linear regression with random effects, they are effectively equivalent to standardised mean differences (ie, Cohen’s d). Under the current design, we have sufficient power (>80%) to detect a mean difference if the standardised mean difference is at least d=0.45; Cohen’s d values of 0.2 and 0.5 are generally considered ‘small’ and ‘medium’ in the behavioural sciences, suggesting we are sufficiently powered to detect a small-to-medium effect.80
Discussion
Cannabis use is increasingly common in the USA and associated with adverse outcomes across a range of domains, including sleep.8 10 81 Given that fewer than 10% of individuals who use cannabis frequently seek cannabis-focused treatment,82 novel strategies to improve the health and functioning of this population, addressing their key concerns, are needed. Insomnia, which is highly prevalent among individuals who frequently use cannabis,81 may be a viable target for improving sleep and reducing cannabis use while improving functioning. Consequently, our study will be the first fully powered RCT to evaluate the effects of a first-line treatment for chronic insomnia on outcomes including insomnia, daytime functioning and cannabis use in adults who frequently use cannabis and experience chronic insomnia. In addition, the study will evaluate treatment-related changes in a fundamental sleep mechanism—sleep homeostasis—and its association with cannabis misuse. Study findings that are consistent with the hypotheses would provide support for CBTi-CB as a novel clinical approach to improve insomnia and reduce cannabis use in this population, while simultaneously advancing the understanding of a sleep mechanism underlying the association between sleep dysfunction and clinical outcomes.
This fully powered RCT of CBTi-CB in individuals with frequent cannabis use and insomnia is innovative for a number of reasons. First, it is focused on the intersection of cannabis use and insomnia; to the best of our knowledge, our prior pilot study was the first to address these common and co-occurring problems. Second, we take a pragmatic approach to addressing negative outcomes for individuals with frequent cannabis use by targeting a highly prevalent co-occurring condition in this population. By focusing on insomnia with a non-substance-related approach, we hypothesise that individuals will reduce cannabis use and improve overall functioning. Third, this study targets non-treatment-seeking individuals who frequently use cannabis, representing a unique, yet growing population of adults, with an evidence-based intervention that is tailored37 to individuals who use cannabis for insomnia. Finally, we will determine whether the proposed mechanism of action of the intervention (ie, improving sleep homeostasis) accounts for observed changes in cannabis use over the follow-up interval. Emerging research highlights the importance of sleep homeostasis, and this study will be the first to apply rigorous laboratory methods to individuals with frequent cannabis use.
In summary, this RCT is designed to evaluate a novel approach to addressing insomnia, daytime symptoms and cannabis use among adults who frequently use cannabis. The findings from this study will inform future clinical practice for individuals who frequently use cannabis and provide scientific insights on the associations between brain mechanisms of sleep and clinical outcomes in this population.
Trial status
This protocol is V.5, last updated on 8 April 2024. The trial began participant recruitment on 1 May 2023 with an anticipated completion date of 31 August 2027.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
This study received ethical approval on 29 August 2022, from IRBMED at the University of Michigan. IRBMED additionally approved the ICF, to be signed by all participants.
Availability of data and materials
All data will be submitted to the National Institute of Mental Health Data Archive. All investigators will have access to the finalised dataset.
Supplementary material