Introduction
Substance use remains a major public health problem in the United States (SAMHSA, 2017), particularly for mothers in the perinatal period, for whom stress, relapse rates, and risk for overdose are considerable concerns (Jones et al., 2017; Rodriguez and Smith, 2019). Many mothers reduce their substance use throughout pregnancy. Yet rates of use and overdose increase sharply after giving birth (i.e., when a mother may become pregnant again) and even exceed rates seen prior to becoming pregnant initially (Massachusetts Department of Public Health, 2017). These figures are concerning given that substance use during and after pregnancy often impacts multiple generations, through direct teratogenic routes and indirect environmental paths, respectively.
Previous reviews have presented details on the effects of prenatal substance exposure from lifespan (Morie et al., 2019), early childhood behavior (Frank et al., 2001), childhood neurobiological (Derauf et al., 2009), and policy (Thompson et al., 2009) perspectives. Here, we summarize neuroimaging studies that describe the potential consequences of prenatal substance exposure on infant, child, adolescent, adult, and parent neurobiology and behavior. This piece represents an update of Morie et al. (2019) that includes studies published since 2018, and presents findings across the lifespan into late adolescence and early adulthood, including as individuals enter parenthood and begin influencing the next generation through their caregiving behaviors. We organize our summary based on the three primary domains in which findings generally coalesce: (1) sensorimotor development; (2) arousal, motivation, and reward; and (3) executive functioning, impulse control, and emotion regulation. Within each domain, we provide an overview of the neural correlates of prenatal substance exposure across the developmental spectrum. Although neuroimaging approaches each have their own strengths and weaknesses (Neil and Smyser, 2018), included in this mini-review are studies that utilize a variety of approaches (e.g., electroencephalography, event-related potentials, functional magnetic resonance imaging, diffusion tensor imaging) to allow for a broad synthesis of the neural outcomes of individuals who were prenatally exposed to substances.
Importantly, while this review is not specifically focused on a methodological critique of each of the published studies cited, we note that there is enormous methodological variability across studies that limit the ability both to combine findings and make broad generalizations. This methodological variability is especially evident in the varying sample sizes, often a challenge in neuroimaging studies generally, and in the varying definitions and quantification of early exposures. Additionally, the older the children and adolescents, the more likely there are significant environmental disruptions in their lives including continued parental drug use, neglect and abuse, repeated episodes of foster care, early initiation of drug use by the adolescent or young adult, and so on. These disruptions have significant developmental impacts making it very difficult if not impossible to parse the relative contributions of early drug exposure along with continued environmental stress. Rarely do the studies included in this review have a sufficiently rigorous assessment of the environmental contributions to their participants' lives and outcomes. Thus, in this review, we offer the summary of reported findings to date not as a methodological endorsement of study rigor but rather as a review of possible “signals” across studies warranting further consideration and additional study refinements.
Two other caveats are important to note. First, we consider substance abuse and its potential teratologic impact more broadly than a focus on specific drugs. There are many reviews regularly updated (see, for example, Duko et al., 2022; Guille and Aujla, 2019; Sharapova et al., 2018; Singer et al., 2020). Here we focus on an addictive process, a disruption of early reward system and stress regulatory biology by a host of different agents (including prenatal environmental stress) and suggest that across exposures, these are key systems being disrupted with ongoing and later implications for normative development as well as increased risk for psychopathology. We recognize that this broader “process” focus may be inadequate for the biological specificity of certain drugs. But we also argue that the question of lasting effects of prenatal and early postnatal exposures to substances of abuse is too often framed as a simple question of biological teratogenicity. This frame obscures the potential long-term impact of disruption in parental stress-reward biology with the attendant impact on parenting behaviors and similar biology in the child. Thus, our broader frame is intended to encourage more discussion around interactive mechanisms for substance abuse and exposure-related developmental disruptions across the lifespan.
Our third and final caveat is around the “lifespan perspective”. Focusing on the individual, this perspective simply means predicting from early to later in life. There are a few published studies from rigorously maintained prenatally exposed cohorts that are beginning to report longitudinal predictions from childhood to late adolescence and early adulthood (See, for example, Scheyer et al., 2019; Singer et al., 2020; Vassoler and Wimmer, 2020). Hopefully, more of these studies will come into the literature over these next five years as these cohorts continue to age and continue to be followed. We also consider a lifespan perspective to be an intergenerational one. With this frame, we consider the impact of substance use on parenting behaviors and how, in turn, that impact continues to influence the child who was also prenatally exposed when that child remains in the care of their biological parent. While studies are just now appearing linking ongoing disruptions in parenting behavior among substance-using adults and their offspring (see, for example, Rutherford and Mayes, 2019;Rutherford et al., 2021), these are still very few given the practical, clinical, and methodological challenges inherent in maintaining substance-using families together. We argue though that many of the disruptions in the three domains suggested in the neuroimaging literature may be as much related to substance-abuse related disruptions in parental care as to the initial prenatal/postnatal exposure. Further, we argue that this impact of parental behavior increases the risk for substance use in their offspring regardless of (or in addition to) the direct biologic exposure; and with this increased risk for substance use in the offspring comes additive risk for the offspring struggling as parents with their children—hence, a lifespan, intergenerational impact.
With these caveats, we turn to the three domains that are most commonly reported on as impacted across different substances of exposure and different chronological/developmental ages.
Sensorimotor development
Prenatal exposures are associated with differences in sensory processing, including systems associated with visual perception, auditory processing, and motor development. One of the few domains that can be assessed even very early in infancy, neuroimaging methods assessing sensory processes are especially valuable because they may point to early, potentially predictive, markers of the ways substances may impact the developing brain in utero. In terms of visual perception, results have been variable. One small study found no differences between cocaine/ amphetamine-exposed and non-exposed infants' visual evoked potential (VEP) latencies or amplitudes (Hansen et al., 1993), whereas others report delayed visual VEP latencies in methadone-exposed four-month-olds compared to non-exposed peers (Whitham et al., 2010). These effects may persist throughout infancy as evidenced by longitudinal research noting delayed VEP latencies in infants prenatally exposed to marijuana and tobacco at 18-months of age (Scher et al., 1998). Amplitudes were also generally smaller with increased levels of exposure suggesting an impact not just on speed of detection but also on processing. Although data from infancy generally suggest maturational delays in the visual system, research on toddlers indicates that by age three, there were no VEP latency or amplitude differences in children who were prenatally exposed to methadone or buprenorphine vs. those not exposed (Whitham et al., 2015). However, in contrast, neural differences in visual perception were found in adolescents who were prenatally exposed to tobacco. These adolescents show decreased activation in the lingual, occipital, and middle temporal gyri (i.e., regions associated with visual processing and salience orientation) during reward anticipation (Müller et al., 2013). This finding may reflect a delayed expression of an earlier exposure effect that becomes more evident with puberty related neural changes, a point more broadly relevant to other effects of prenatal exposures. That is, not all impacts of exposures are evident in infancy. Some may become evident depending on environmental conditions as well as neural changes with maturation (Glover et al., 2018; Šlamberová, 2019).
Neural underpinnings of auditory processing may also be impacted by prenatal drug exposure. For example, methadone-exposed infants who were between 33 and 120 days old demonstrated P2 amplitude differences, whereas no differences were seen in younger methadone-exposed infants aged between 4 and 42 days (Paul et al., 2014). Prenatal nicotine exposure has also shown a correlation with the development of auditory processing, with exposed infants demonstrating significantly smaller N550 amplitudes and reduced delta band power compared to non-exposed infants. These prenatal nicotine exposure effects may have real-world behavioral implications, with exposed infants also being less likely to orient to the sound of a bell ringing with a head turn (King et al., 2018) or perhaps to the higher pitched sounds of caregivers' voices (though this has not been studied in these populations). However, in contrast, one magnetoencephalography (MEG) study noted, that buprenorphine-exposed infants did not differ from non-exposed infants in terms of auditory-evoked magnetic fields (AEFs) or sensory-evoked magnetic fields (SEFs) (Kivistö et al., 2015). Thus, the auditory processing findings may depend in part on the methods used, the specific exposures, and other variations in the samples.
In terms of motor development in the context of prenatal exposure, infants prenatally exposed to cocaine demonstrate decreased connectivity between the thalamus and motor regions, an effect which is associated with poorer overall motor performance on a standardized, norm-referenced developmental test (Salzwedel et al., 2016). Another report notes that in terms of marijuana exposure, when compared to non-exposed controls and drug-exposed peers who were not exposed to marijuana, marijuana-exposed infants demonstrated hypoconnectivity between the right caudate–cerebellum and left caudate–cerebellum (with implications in the integration and coordination of motor activities), and between the right caudate–occipital/fusiform regions (with implications in visual-spatial processing and motion perception) (Grewen et al., 2015). Importantly, motor development and motor coordination in infancy and early childhood is very dependent on other factors known to be associated with substance-using environments including poor nutrition and reductions in the kinds of social stimulation that encourages infant movement (Dulal et al., 2021).
Less is known about the ways in which prenatal exposure is related to motor-related neurodevelopment in childhood and adolescence. However, substance-exposed emerging adults continue to show differences in motor regions of the brain, though these patterns may have less to do with motor difficulties and more to do with other higher-order neural processes impacted by ongoing substance use. For example, adults that were prenatally exposed to marijuana showed increased activation in primary somatosensory cortex as compared to non-exposed adults during multiple processes including a Go/No-Go task, suggesting that exposed individuals may require greater neural resources to successfully perform response inhibition and other executive processes (Smith et al., 2016) (see below for a discussion of executive functioning).
Arousal, motivation, and reward
Arousal, motivation, and reward are processes of great interest in the neuroscientific study of prenatal substance exposure given that disruptions in these behavioral processes are some of the most commonly named consequences of prenatal exposure (Mayes, 2006), and continued disruptions in these processes have been linked to substance use initiation later in life (Jordan and Andersen, 2017). Early markers of potential arousal dysregulation have been seen in substance-exposed infants, as suggested by links between prenatal cocaine exposure and increased connectivity in amygdala-frontal circuitry implicated in emotion regulation (Salzwedel et al., 2015). Similar results are seen in polysubstance-exposed infants who showed increased connectivity between the amygdala and frontal regions at an earlier developmental time than expected (Gee, 2021), as well as decreased connectivity between the thalamus and hippocampus (Grewen et al., 2015). Marijuana-specific hypoconnectivity has been reported between the left anterior insula and cerebellum, raising the possibility of potential impact on the integration of interoceptive states and external cues to influence salience and reward value which may in turn guide reward-driven behavior (Grewen et al., 2015).
Later in development, adolescents who were prenatally exposed to substances showed reduced activation in brain areas associated with reward processing including the ventral striatum, middle frontal gyrus, anterior cingulate cortex, superior parietal cortex, and medial and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices (Müller et al., 2013; Yip et al., 2014). Prenatally exposed adolescents also demonstrated decreased parietal connectivity in response to stressful stimuli, in contrast with increased parietal connectivity in response to relaxing stimuli (Zakiniaeiz et al., 2017). Exposed adolescents who reported having used substances themselves also showed decreased activation to reward stimuli and increased activation to relaxing stimuli in the bilateral insula and superior temporal gyrus (Yip et al., 2016). Overall, these findings suggest that aberrant arousal, motivation, and reward neural processes may be responsible, in part, for previous findings that adolescents who were prenatally exposed to substances tend to experiment with substances earlier in life and with greater frequency than adolescents who were not prenatally exposed (Richardson et al., 2013; Yip et al., 2016). Other factors may also contribute, including relatively decreased frontal cortical volumes (Rando et al., 2013) and external contextual factors including greater exposure to drug-using environments, more exposure to early and ongoing trauma and adversity, and more disrupted, stressful environments (Hammond et al., 2014; Rutherford et al., 2010). Nonetheless, broadly stated, the “signal” from these different studies is that early exposure to drugs of abuse increases the risk for disruptions in stress-reward regulation with the attendant impact on reward-seeking behavior and stress regulation.
Executive functioning, impulse control, and emotion regulation
Complex, higher-order processing in prenatally exposed individuals has also been examined using neuroimaging methods across the life-span. Although processes like executive functioning, impulse control, working memory, and emotion regulation are difficult to study in infants, neuroimaging methods allow researchers to look for early markers of the impact of prenatal exposure on brain regions supporting these cognitive processes. For example, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) studies illustrate that methadone-exposed infants had higher mean diffusivity (i. e., immature white-matter development) in the superior longitudinal fasciculus as compared to non-exposed infants (Walhovd et al., 2012). Alterations in white-matter development were seen following exposure to methamphetamine as well, with greater exposure being associated with reduced fractional anisotropy (potentially reflective of delayed white-matter development) in connections between multiple brain regions (Warton et al., 2018). White-matter development may be sex-specific and region-specific, however. For example, male infants prenatally exposed to both methamphetamine and tobacco demonstrate lower fractional anisotropy and higher diffusivity in the superior and posterior corona radiata, whereas female infants show lower fractional anisotropy in the anterior corona radiata (Chang et al., 2016). There are other suggestions in the prenatal exposure literature that especially by adolescence, there are differences in outcomes for males and females, suggesting again that puberty may moderate the longer-term impact of prenatal drug exposures (Dorn et al., 2019; Fried et al., 2001; Tirado-Muñoz et al., 2020).
With regard to the potential for broad cognitive impacts as children age, multiple magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies report reduced gray-matter volume in children who were prenatally exposed to maternal cocaine (Akyuz et al., 2014), methamphetamine (Chang et al., 2004), and polysubstance use (Walhovd et al., 2007) as compared to non-exposed children. White matter also appears to be affected by prenatal exposure, with opioid-exposed infants more commonly showing white-matter lesions and white-matter signal differences compared to controls (England-Mason et al., 2020), and children aged 10 to 14 years demonstrating reductions in brain volume in the basal ganglia, thalamus, and cerebellar white matter (Sirnes et al., 2017). DTI studies have also revealed general alterations in white-matter maturation with young children aged 3 to 4 years who were prenatally exposed to methamphetamine showing lower apparent diffusion coefficients in frontal and parietal white-matter regions, suggestive of more compact axons and/or higher dendritic density, in addition to higher fractional anisotropy in left frontal white-matter regions, potentially reflective of decreased synaptic pruning, higher cell density, and restriction of water movement (Cloak et al., 2009). Lower fractional anisotropy was also noted in central, inferior, and posterior white-matter regions (i.e., areas where myelination occurs early in central nervous system development) in a sample of older children aged 8 to 13 years who were exposed to opiates and other substances, possibly indicating that these areas are particularly vulnerable to the negative effects of exposures during key periods of prenatal development (Walhovd et al., 2010).
As children get older, these neural findings have been linked with behavior. Less mature development of frontal white matter in prenatally exposed children has been associated with poorer performance on executive functioning tasks including a Trail Making Test and Stroop task (Warner et al., 2006). Electroencephalography (EEG) studies confirm neural underpinnings of executive functioning deficits, with children who experienced prenatal cocaine exposure demonstrating smaller and slower P1, N2, and P3 responses during a Stroop task, as compared to non-exposed controls (Mayes et al., 2005). Similar results were found in tobacco-exposed children who demonstrated smaller N2 and P3 amplitudes during a Go/No-Go task, as compared to non-exposed children, which was associated with greater hyperactivity, impulsivity, and other externalizing behaviors in the classroom setting (Boucher et al., 2014). Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), others found that while performing a Go/No-Go task, children aged 8 to 9 years who were prenatally exposed to cocaine showed greater activation in the right inferior frontal cortex and caudate, potentially reflective of long-term effects of prenatal cocaine exposure on the maturation of brain systems involved in response inhibition, resulting in compensatory mechanisms during executive functioning tasks (Sheinkopf et al., 2009).
Adolescent and adult samples continue to show neural markers of higher-order processing impairments following prenatal substance exposure. For example, compared to non-exposed adolescents, prenatally exposed adolescents demonstrated reduced P300 amplitudes in response to no-win feedback, localized specifically in the dorsolateral-prefrontal cortex, suggesting challenges with cognitive control (Morie et al., 2018). In terms of brain regions associated with response inhibition, adolescents who were prenatally exposed to maternal tobacco use showed greater superior frontal, inferior frontal, and anterior cingulate activation (Bennett et al., 2009), and those exposed to maternal polysubstance use demonstrated increased activation in the right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, right cuneus, and left inferior parietal lobe during correct trials of a Go/No-Go task, possibly suggesting a compensatory mechanism in which exposed individuals require more neural resources to inhibit behavior (Roos et al., 2017). Prenatal polysubstance exposure was also associated with decreased activation in the occipital lobe during false alarm trials (Roos et al., 2017). Several of these neural patterns associated with impaired response inhibition may persist into emerging adulthood, with exposed individuals (mean age 21 years) showing greater inferior frontal gyrus, anterior cingulate, thalamus, inferior parietal lobule, basal ganglia, and posterior cerebellum activation compared to non-exposed individuals during a Go/No-Go task (Longo et al., 2013).
Emerging adults exposed to marijuana specifically demonstrated patterns of increased bilateral prefrontal cortex and right premotor cortex activation and decreased left cerebellum activation during Go/No-Go performance (Smith et al., 2004). Seemingly conflicting results were found in a sample of slightly older adults (mean age 25 years) who were prenatally exposed, with a pattern of reduced activation in the anterior cingulate, supramarginal gyrus, and inferior frontal gyrus (Holz et al., 2014). On a Stroop task, marijuana-exposed adults similarly showed increased activation in the right superior frontal gyrus, suggestive of increased blood flow required to successfully mediate response selection, and the left cuneus, suggestive of differences in visual processing (Smith et al., 2016). Generally, researchers have suggested that such findings are indicative of an overall immature pattern of executive functioning that may have long-term ramifications for exposed individuals' likelihood of inhibiting risk-taking behavior such as substance use, thereby potentially increasing the likelihood of intergenerational prenatal substance exposure. Importantly, many fewer studies examine the continuity between early findings and those in late adolescence or adulthood. Those studies that have examined longitudinal continuity find increased risk for later cognitive impairments among those adults who showed impaired or delayed functioning as younger children (Coles et al., 2010; Hrebíčková et al., 2014; Lynch et al., 2017; Oei, 2018; Willford et al., 2021), a finding suggesting, at least for some individuals, early increased risk continues across the lifespan. Predicting those individuals for whom early risk conveys potentially lifelong vulnerabilities is key also to better understanding the most relevant biomarkers to examine across all prenatal substance exposures and to consider for clinical settings with this population as well.
With regard to two related sub-domains of executive functioning (i. e., working memory and selective attention), compared to non-exposed peers, opioid-exposed school-age children showed greater activation in prefrontal areas while performing a combined n-back and Stroop task (Sirnes et al., 2018). In adolescence, others have shown that adolescents prenatally exposed to heroin and/or cocaine evidenced less activation than non-exposed adolescents in the left middle frontal gyrus and culmen (Schweitzer et al., 2015), although earlier work did not find differences in neural activation between exposed and non-exposed individuals during n-back tasks (Hurt et al., 2008). In contrast, other recent work showed that emerging adults who were prenatally exposed to marijuana demonstrated increased activation of the left middle occipital gyrus, cerebellum, and right superior temporal gyrus when performing a letter 2-back task, suggestive of disrupted working-memory circuitry requiring greater blood flow to complete working-memory tasks successfully (Smith et al., 2016).
General memory function may also be impacted by prenatal exposures as evidenced by exposed adolescents demonstrating increased activation in the left parahippocampal gyrus and bilateral hippocampus during early and delayed visuospatial recognition tasks, respectively (Jacobsen et al., 2006). Other investigators note that although exposed and non-exposed adolescents do not show differing neural patterns associated with memory retrieval, memory encoding may be impacted by prenatal exposure. Specifically, hemispheric differences were seen in hippocampal activation between exposed and non-exposed adolescents. Adolescents who were prenatally exposed to heroin and/or cocaine showed greater differences in activation in the right hemisphere between remembered and forgotten items, whereas non-exposed individuals demonstrated greater differences in the left hemisphere. Given that the right hippocampal formation is associated with spatial and nonverbal processing and the left is associated with verbal processing, these results suggest that these groups may be employing different encoding strategies (Geng et al., 2018), an interpretation relevant to considering interventions for prenatally exposed adolescents.
Prenatal substance exposure has also been associated with differences in neural processes associated with the regulation of emotion. For example, young children who experienced prenatal exposure demonstrated greater right frontal EEG asymmetry and greater overall EEG activation in response to emotional stimuli, which has been linked to greater levels of negative affect as well as a lower threshold for reactivity and stronger intensity of reaction more generally (Jones et al., 2004). The impact of prenatal cocaine exposure may persist into adolescence, with those who were prenatally exposed showing blunted activation in the ventral prefrontal cortex paired with a corresponding increase in amygdala activation while performing a working-memory task with emotional distractors (Li et al., 2013). This neural profile appears to persist longitudinally for prenatally exposed adolescents, as evidenced by heightened amygdala activation when assessed at ages 14 and 16 years, whereas non-exposed peers show an overall decrease in amygdala activation to emotional distractors between these two timepoints (Li et al., 2016).
Parents and the intergenerational neural implications of substance use
As discussed earlier, considering a lifespan perspective on substance abuse also need to consider the impact of substance abuse on parenting behaviors since parental care also impacts early brain development including those circuits known to be impacted by prenatal exposure to some drugs of abuse. Substance abuse may impact how parents are able to process and respond to infant cues especially infant distress. In turn, repeatedly impaired response to infant distress impacts infants' own self-regulatory capacities (Baker, 2018; Morawska et al., 2019) and may not only increase that adolescent's risk for substance abuse but also their risk for neglectful parenting of their own infants. Importantly, substance use in adulthood is associated with alterations in maternal neurobiology in all three domains discussed in this review: sensory processing; arousal, motivation, and reward; and executive functioning, impulse control, and emotion regulation. Alterations in these domains impact how parents respond to their infants' and children's cues and needs.
Under certain experimental conditions, early ERP components (e.g., N100, N170) may reflect mothers' processing of specific sensory perceptions, including initial auditory orientation to infant auditory cues and infant facial structural encoding, respectively. One recent study utilized an experimental task to compare the neural responses of mothers with and without polysubstance addictions to stimuli considered relevant to caregiving (i.e., sounds of infant crying and images of infant faces). This study showed that mothers with addictions were significantly slower to orient to infant cries (N100) as compared to mothers without addictions (Lowell et al., 2020). Mothers with addictions also failed to differentiate between infant facial expressions at early perceptual stages (N170), whereas their control counterparts were faster to structurally encode sad infant faces as compared to neutral infant faces (Lowell et al., 2020). Nicotine addiction also may impact mothers' sensory processing, with tobacco-smoking mothers demonstrating delayed N170 latency to infant faces as compared to non-smoking mothers, suggesting slower facial structural encoding (Rutherford et al., 2017).
The Reward-Stress Dysregulation Model of Parenting and Addiction (Rutherford et al., 2013; Rutherford et al., 2011) integrates findings from multiple studies suggesting that mothers who use substances demonstrate altered neural activity in brain regions associated with reward, motivation, arousal, and stress, which overlap with regions associated with caregiving and are proposed to alter the motivational salience of caregiving-related cues. For example, compared to non-substance-using mothers, mothers who use substances demonstrated decreased activation in the dorsolateral and prefrontal cortices, occipital lobes, parahippocampus, and amygdala when viewing pictures of unfamiliar infant faces, and decreased activation in prefrontal regions, auditory sensory regions, insula, parahippocampus, and amygdala when listening to the sound of unfamiliar infants crying (Landi et al., 2011). Mothers who use substances also demonstrated attenuated patterns of activation in the ventral striatum, ventromedial prefrontal cortex, and hypothalamus when shown pictures of their own infant smiling, suggesting reduced arousal in response to stimuli that are considered naturally hedonically rewarding and may activate a cascade of caregiving responses (Kim et al., 2017). Further, compared to control mothers, mothers who use substances demonstrated relatively decreased activation in the ventral striatum in response to sad infant faces, potentially suggesting decreased salience of caregiving-related stimuli and lower motivation to provide care and relieve infant distress (Rutherford et al., 2020). Lower motivation to provide care to a distressed infant may also mean the infant's cry is more stressful to a substance-using mother with that stress eliciting increasing craving for drugs to relieve maternal stress. In this way, the mother turns away from caring for her infant to decrease her own stress. That is, a negative reinforcement model of substance use in mothers may account for the link between parental neglect and abuse and substance abuse (Rutherford and Mayes, 2017).
Finally, neural processes underlying executive functioning, emotion regulation, and other complex cognitive process that are altered by prenatal substance exposure have also been implicated in maternal substance use and may ultimately impact caregiving behavior and the developing child. For example, mothers with addictions did not show differences in P300 amplitude in response to high-distress versus low-distress infant cries, suggesting equivalent attention allocation regardless of the level of distress or urgency of the need an infant cry may signify; in contrast, mothers without addictions showed greater P300 amplitudes in response to high-distress cries, signifying a potentially adaptive heightened response to more urgent infant cues (Lowell et al., 2020). Mothers with polysubstance and nicotine addictions also exhibited altered attention allocation to infant faces, with multiple studies showing that addiction is associated with greater P300 amplitude in response to neutral infant faces as compared to happy and sad infant faces, whereas control mothers' P300 responses did not vary based on facial expression (Lowell et al., 2020; Rutherford et al., 2017). This suggests mothers with addictions are allocating more attention to potentially ambiguous stimuli rather than unambiguous stimuli. Other studies highlight that reduced activation in the prefrontal cortex seen in mothers with addictions (Kim et al., 2017; Landi et al., 2011) are associated with difficulties in emotion regulation and increased risk for harsh and neglectful caregiving (Swain et al., 2014), placing the next generation at psychosocial risk for behavioral challenges including initiation of substance use.
Overall, the frequency and impact of prenatal exposure in these maternal samples are not precisely known, that is, data from prenatally exposed infants now adults and parents have not yet been reported though there are several prenatally exposed cohorts with participants now parenting their own children. However, given that altered sensory processing, attenuated activity in brain regions associated with reward processing, and differences in multiple areas of executive functioning have been documented in both prenatally exposed individuals and mothers who use substances, further research is needed to determine if substance exposure at any point in life (i.e., in utero or as an adult) increases the likelihood for the intergenerational transmission of substance use and addictions via neural mechanisms. Further, these alterations in mothers who use substances may also impact parenting behavior in ways that alter the development of these same functional domains in infants, whether prenatally exposed or not.
Conclusions
The negative neural consequences of prenatal substance exposure across the lifespan are varied, sometimes subtle, but also concerning given the potential intergenerational implications. While studies have a range of methodological concerns and sometimes contradictory findings, there is broad consistency in findings. That is, individuals who were prenatally exposed to substances demonstrate an array of aberrant neurodevelopmental outcomes from infancy through adulthood as evidenced by a vast and growing body of literature. Despite organizing this summary of Morie et al. (2019) by domain rather than developmental epoch, the conclusions remain: altered connectivity, with hyperconnectivity noted in frontal regions and hypoconnectivity noted in subcortical regions (Grewen et al., 2015; Salzwedel et al., 2016; Salzwedel et al., 2015), has been seen in infancy. In childhood, diffusion data suggest white-matter deficits (Colby et al., 2012), and the preponderance of data from fMRI and ERP studies suggest that the behavioral concerns exhibited by exposed children (especially males) may relate to differences in the neural correlates of executive-function processes (Boucher et al., 2014; Fisher et al., 2011; Mayes et al., 2005; Sheinkopf et al., 2009) and increased frustration when performing tasks (Jones et al., 2004). The extent to which these findings may relate to patterns of altered connectivity seen in infancy requires additional longitudinal investigation and linking early findings to studies of those same individuals as adolescents and young adults.
In adolescence, multiple studies find that prenatally drug-exposed individuals have altered brain activations that may relate to inhibition (Bennett et al., 2009; Roos et al., 2017) and working memory (Hurt et al., 2008; Jacobsen et al., 2006; Schweitzer et al., 2015), suggesting that more cognitive effort may need to be exerted to perform executive tasks at comparable levels. In addition, the few studies that have examined reward processing in adolescents suggest blunted activations during processing of monetary (Müller et al., 2013) and food (Yip et al., 2016; Yip et al., 2014) rewards, consistent with reward-deficit theories of addiction and addiction vulnerability (Blum et al., 2000). Altered connectivity between reward-related brain regions have also been reported (Li et al., 2016), which is notable because adolescents with prenatal drug exposure may turn to more intense sources of reward and thus be particularly vulnerable to transitioning from substance-use initiation to addiction. These connectivity findings in adolescence may relate to the hypoconnectivity of reward-related brain areas observed in prenatally exposed infants. Prenatally drug-exposed adolescents may also demonstrate effects, either behaviorally or at neural levels of processing, with respect to language processing (Landi et al., 2017; Landi et al., 2012) and memory encoding (Geng et al., 2018).
Finally, the preponderance of data suggesting prenatal exposure to substances is marked by a reduction in activation of reward systems and alterations in the neural processes underlying executive functioning processes may require increased cognitive effort to perform adequately.
In turn, increased cognitive effort to perform at normal levels may result in frustration throughout the lifespan that increases stress and leads to use of other substances, although this notion is largely speculative. As the Guo et al. (1994) study suggests, neural changes relating to prenatal drug exposure may also coincide with environmental impacts of growing up with a substance-abusing parent, and environmental influences may become increasingly relevant as children mature. As adolescents mature into emerging adulthood, the pattern of increased neural activation, possibly reflecting increased neural effort, often persists during processes involving response inhibition (Longo et al., 2013; Smith et al., 2004; Smith et al., 2016) and working memory (Longo et al., 2013; Smith et al., 2006).
Future directions
Though many studies have examined the neural impacts of prenatal exposure, there is still much to learn about the functional significance of these aberrations throughout the lifespan and across generations. As first conveyed by Morie et al. (2019), the longest reported follow-up has been with adolescents. More reports are needed in other developmental stages including infancy and childhood where interventions may be most beneficial and in emerging adulthood when individuals are tasked with becoming independent and are more likely to increase their use of substances, often to detrimental levels. There is a paucity of published findings from these age groups. Additionally, further work with extant longitudinal cohorts has the opportunity to focus on young adulthood and also parenting among those prenatally exposed adults who are now parents. Propensities to develop problems with non-substance addictions (e.g., gambling, gaming) in prenatally exposed individuals also warrant investigation. Finally, given gender-related differences in behavior in prenatally drug-exposed individuals, studies should consider gender in examinations in order to determine if exposure to specific substances may exert deleterious effects in gender-specific fashions.
We acknowledge that it is difficult to tease apart the unique impact of prenatal exposure versus postnatal exposure to stress and adversity (including being cared for by a parent engaging in addictive behaviors or with an addiction). Therefore, future work would benefit from larger, more heterogeneous samples that allow for between-group analyses to compare the outcomes of prenatal exposure specifically versus the experience of being raised by a mother who uses substances. Additionally, ongoing work will benefit from more detailed consideration of the caring environment including parental behavior. Finally, multi-generational studies are important to better understand the role of prenatal exposure in the possible transmission of risk for substance use. Future studies should assess whether mothers who use substances during pregnancy were themselves exposed prenatally to substances so researchers can better characterize the contributions substances may make at different developmental periods within families and potential contributions to parenting capacities among adults with addictions.