Introduction
The increasing prevalence of cannabis has prompted research to better understand its effects on the brain and behavior. Cannabinoids, such as delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), within cannabis bind to cannabinoid receptors which are found primarily in the neocortex of the brain [1, 2]. Receptor binding causes attentional disturbances, euphoria, relaxation, and psychedelic effects [3]. These effects may lead to many of the reported positive experiences among those who consume cannabis (e.g., improved mood and sleep)[4, 5], but may also heighten the development of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and schizophrenia in those with genetic high risk [6]. Cannabis has a causal relationship with psychotic-like behaviors like those viewed in schizophrenia [7, 8]. In terms of prenatal exposure to cannabis, further research is warranted since cannabis is becoming more widely used, even among pregnant women [9–13]. Cannabis alters all aspects of attention such as selective attention [3], attentional bias [14], attentional processing dysfunction [15], and divided attention [16]. Since the brain and body undergo critical developmental stages during fetal life, prenatal cannabis exposure (PCE) negatively impacts these development stages, leading to alterations in children’s cognition (including attention), sleep, birth weight, gestational age at birth, body mass index (BMI), brain structure, social behavior, and IQ [17–19].
Smoking tobacco is one of the most preventable causes of death and disease in our society [20–22]. Nicotine, the major addictive substance in tobacco, makes quitting extremely difficult. Smoking tobacco is both positively and negatively reinforcing on the brain and body [21, 22]. Evidence indicates that maternal cigarette smoking during pregnancy (SDP) leads to undesirable effects on offspring including low birth weight, preterm birth, and various birth defects [23]. In 2016, the United States reported that 7.2% of women who gave birth smoked cigarettes during their pregnancy, and the prevalence of SDP was highest among women ages 20–24 (10.7%), and lowest among women aged 45 and over (2.0%) [23]. Nicotine activates virtually all neurotransmitter and neuromodulator systems by activation of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAchRs) [20]. Nicotine-dependent smokers experience attentional deficits during nicotine withdrawal since tobacco is quickly removed from circulation [20]. Smoking temporarily improves attention and recall by enhancing cognitive function and decreasing tiredness [20]. Despite these effects, cognitive enhancement is not a large factor in the initiation of smoking nicotine [20]. Prenatal nicotine exposure (PNE) also remains a growing concern in many areas of the world, including developed countries. SDP is harmful to the fetus and causes significant developmental and cognitive issues that persist into adulthood such as low IQ, attention problems, and reduced academic achievement [24]. Electronic cigarette (e-cig) use has increased among adolescents despite a lack of research on e-cig usage’s long-term effects [25]. More research is required to determine e-cigarettes’ effects, especially since e-cigs were introduced to the public with little or no regulation [25].
Cannabis
Cannabis comes from the plant Cannabis sativa L. and is one of the most widely used federally illicit drugs in the Western world [3]. With an increase in legalization, cannabis is becoming more widely accepted by the public. Approximately 49.5% of people ages 12 and older in the United States have reported using cannabis in their lifetime [26]. Intake affects cognitive functioning, including attention [3]. Adolescents are particularly vulnerable to cannabis’ long-term cognitive effects [27]. In rats, long-term cannabinoid exposure resulted in impairment of working memory and executive function [28]. Cannabis contains THC, which produces relaxing, euphoric, and psychedelic effects. Chronic use of THC at high doses is associated with the early onset of psychological disorders (i.e. schizophrenia and ADHD) and relapse of psychotic disorders [6, 29]. Cannabis use is also associated with depressive and anxiety symptoms, violent offending, neurocognitive and social impairments, and medical co-morbidities [14]. Cannabis additionally induces acute deficits in motor skills, verbal expression, mathematical abilities, and time perception [30]. Some neurocognitive impairments with cannabis are also viewed in patients with schizophrenia [15]. Long-term use of cannabis in individuals with and without schizophrenia had differences in attentional processing, which may reflect alterations in the endocannabinoid system in patients with schizophrenia [15]. Cannabis use in adolescents with a genetic high risk of developing schizophrenia is associated with worse mental health problems [6]. As concluded by a 2008 review paper, regular cannabis use is associated with an increased risk of developing schizophrenia [31], but there is conflicting evidence of whether cannabis worsens cognitive impairments in those with schizophrenia. A recent review concluded that for individuals with schizophrenia, cannabis use may be linked with improved learning and memory [32]. However, during active intoxication with cannabis, cognitive impairments in attention and memory are observed [33]. Heavy cannabis use is associated with reduced function of the attentional/executive system, but it is unclear whether these cognitive impairments are permanent [34]. Cannabis has different mechanisms of action in the brain depending on route of administration (ROA), which creates a more complex understanding of cannabis binding in the brain; therefore, impairments with cannabis should not be associated with blood cannabinoid concentrations [16]. Despite this, cannabis has many medical applications, including the potential to treat multiple sclerosis-related symptoms of muscle spasms and tremors, stimulate appetite and prevent vomiting in cancer patients, and relieve pain in patients with neuropathic pain [30].
Cannabis Mechanism of Action
The main psychoactive cannabinoid extracted from cannabis, THC, functions by binding to and activating cannabinoid-1 receptors (CB1Rs) and cannabinoid-2 receptors (CB2Rs) [35]. Cannabis alters cognitive processing in those who use cannabis, which is correlated to functional changes in areas of the brain that are rich in CB1Rs [36]. CB1Rs are particularly concentrated in areas of the brain involved with executive functioning, reward processing, attention, and memory [27]. The brain areas involved in these processes include the prefrontal cortex (PFC), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), basal ganglia, hippocampus, and cerebellum [1, 37]. In the attentional network model, there are three systems working together: networks for alerting, orienting, and executive control [38]. The alerting network is most important for sustained attention, and the other two networks are most involved with selective attention [27]. The orienting network is involved with the connection between the frontal and parietal lobes and has associations with the top-down control of visuospatial attention [38, 39]. The executive control network is mainly involved with top-down attentional control and involves the fronto-parietal network of the brain, which includes the dorsolateral PFC (dLPFC), inferior parietal areas, and cingulo-opercular system (ACC, and anterior insula/frontal operculum) [38, 40]. The areas in the PFC (ACC and dLPFC) have been linked to the initiation and maintenance of cannabis use behaviors due to their high density of CB1Rs [41]. It is possible that CB1Rs in the PFC are associated with functional changes to the executive control network with cannabis use, such that there is a reduced volume in the orbitofrontal cortex and greater functional connectivity.
Nicotine
Nicotine is a widely used drug: approximately 90% of adult smokers start smoking cigarettes before age 18, and more than 70% of young adults reported that they smoked a cigarette at least once in their lives [42, 43]. In clinical observations, the age of first cigarette use is critical in determining the individual’s dependence on tobacco since those who start earlier, such as in their teens, have greater difficulty quitting [43, 44]. Adolescence is a sensitive period for the maturation of brain circuits that regulate cognition and emotion, so nicotine exposure may cause long-term changes in behaviors and neural circuits such as deficits in serotonergic signaling, cognitive function, and attention span, and enhanced impulsivity, anxiety, and fear [45–50]. In those who use tobacco, nicotine increases heart rate and blood pressure and results in dysphoria and pleasure [51]. Nicotine functions by binding to and activating nAChRs, leading to the release of neurotransmitters like dopamine [52]. Dopamine discharge in response to nicotine is associated with drug reinforcement and dependence [52]. Nicotine is a potent, centrally-acting cholinergic agonist that enhances cognition [53]. Nicotine’s enhancing properties are seen in smokers and psychiatric patients with Alzheimer’s disease, schizophrenia, and ADHD, but nicotine’s cognitive-enhancing effects are less understood for healthy nonsmokers [53]. Nicotine enhances activation and functional connectivity between certain regions of the brain involved in attention [54]. As a result, individuals who have attentional problems, such as patients with schizophrenia, may use nicotine-containing products to mitigate this adverse symptom, resulting in a therapeutic effect [54]. For those with attentional problems and healthy people alike, nicotine’s cognitive-enhancing properties include improved attentional processing [55], improved working memory in both humans and animals [56], and increased concentration [57]. These effects contribute to the development of nicotine dependence (ND) especially in people with attentional deficits, since nicotine attenuates these deficits [58]. Today, there are many different methods to use nicotine including cigarettes, e-cigs, transdermal nicotine patches, and oral nicotine products, many of which contain additives other than nicotine and tobacco. Originally e-cigs were marketed as a smoking cessation tool, but currently, adolescents use them instead of cigarettes due to flavorants [25]. In the United States and Canada, e-cig use peaked in 2019, declined in 2020 during the pandemic, and nearly returned to pre-pandemic levels in 2022 [59].
Nicotine Mechanism of Action
The PFC is important for executive functioning and attentional performance, but it is one of the last brain regions to fully develop, so nicotine can cause deficits or incomplete maturation of the PFC [46]. Nicotine may also lead to higher levels of dependence in adolescence by exerting neurotoxic effects in the PFC, which interferes with cognitive development, executive functioning, and inhibitory control [60]. In adolescence, there is a developmental window in which the brain is sensitive to novel experiences, which coincides with an increased vulnerability to drug misuse [61]. Nicotine use during adolescence may produce deficits in the PFC that persist long-term [46]. During sustained attention tasks such as the rapid visual information processing (RVIP) task, the frontal, parietal, occipital, thalamic, and cerebellar regions were activated in smokers and nonsmokers, as evidenced by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) [57]. Smokers had increased activation in the parietal cortex, occipital cortex, thalamus, and caudate during task performance when given a transdermal nicotine patch [57]. Nicotine administration also deactivated specific regions, suggesting that nicotine facilitates the focusing of attentional resources during attention-demanding tasks [57]. In adolescent smokers, nicotine significantly reduced activation in the PFC compared to nonsmokers [62]. Chronic nicotine use during adolescence can lead to long-term effects on brain function due to reduced presynaptic mGluR2 protein with nicotine use [48].
Cannabis/THC Effects on Attention
Cannabis use effects on attention and specifically, selective attention [3], attentional bias [14], attentional processing [15], and divided attention (see Table 1) [16]. There are three different processing systems/networks (see Table 2) that join to form attention within all individuals. When smoking cannabis, one or more of these processes may be altered, resulting in attentional dysfunction. Studies show a correlation between cannabis and psychological disorders that affect attention, such as ADHD and schizophrenia [6, 15, 63, 64].
Research showed differences in resting state functional connectivity (RSFC) within the dorsal (DAN) and ventral (VAN) attention networks in adolescent and young adults who use cannabis after a two-week abstinence period [65]. THC activates the endogenous cannabinoid system (ECB) and binds to CB1Rs [35]. CB1Rs become desensitized or downregulated after repeated cannabis exposure [66]. The ECB develops throughout adolescence and is involved in sustained attention, so when adolescents use cannabis regularly, they experience poor sustained and selective attention and increased attention lapses [67–69]. Looking back to the DAN and VAN, it is theorized that these two fronto-parietal areas are segregated but complementary attentional networks that are involved in alerting, orienting, and executive control (Table 2) [39, 70]. Harris and colleagues found that there was lower functional connectivity in the DAN network in individuals who use cannabis compared to the control group [65]. This was associated with heavier lifetime use patterns, greater cannabis use disorder symptoms, and a shorter length of cannabis abstinence.
In addition, cannabis’ effect on the visual attention network and cerebellar hypoactivation have been demonstrated [71]. Attention and memory deficits are correlated with heavy cannabis use; however, prolonged abstinence may reverse these deficits. This study performed BOLD fMRI in individuals who use cannabis (active and abstinent) and controls and found decreased activation in the right prefrontal, medial, dorsal parietal, and medial cerebellar regions and greater activation in many frontal, parietal, and occipital regions during visual attention tasks in those who use cannabis. The results indicated that the right frontal and medial cerebellar regions normalized compared to controls with the duration of abstinence. Altered BOLD signals in the attention network and hypoactivation of the cerebellum indicate neuroadaptation, altered brain development, and downregulation of CB1Rs in those who chronically use cannabis.
Prenatal Effects of Cannabis and THC on Attention
Clinical and preclinical research has examined the prenatal THC and/or cannabis exposure’s effects on attention in humans and rodents (Table 3).
Clinical Studies on Cannabis/THC and Attention
Many prenatal cannabis studies show a correlation with attention deficits [72], social problems [17], and a lower IQ [16]. Additionally, many children experience difficulties with cognition, sleep, birth weight, gestational age at birth, BMI, and brain structure [17].
Using The Child Behavior Checklist for Toddlers (CBCL 1 ½–5 years), which focuses on anxiety/depression, attention, and aggression, it was found that girls who were exposed to cannabis during gestation experience aggression and attention problems at 18 months old [73]. These effects were observed in female but not male children. Researchers also found that aggressive behavior was only associated with maternal, but not paternal, cannabis intake [73].
Another clinical study of PCE observed attention and social problems in the offspring using the CBCL and data from the Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development (ABCD) study [17]. Paul and colleagues observed associated problems in the offspring with PCE prior to and after maternal knowledge of pregnancy. There was an increased association and risk for psychopathology with PCE both before and after maternal knowledge of pregnancy. However, outcomes in children exposed to cannabis prior to maternal knowledge of pregnancy did not significantly differ from children who were never exposed (Table 3).
Another study focused on prenatal cocaine/polydrug exposure (PCP)’s cognitive effects [74]. The results showed that PCP increased vulnerability to substance use disorders (SUDs) and produced deficits in perceptual reasoning IQ and visual attention in adolescents.
PCE is also associated with an increased risk of children developing ADHD. Roncero and colleagues conducted a systematic review of the relationship between maternal cannabis use and the risk of developing psychiatric disorders, including ADHD [75]. This review mentioned that preclinical studies supported an association between prenatal cannabinoid exposure and central nervous system (CNS)/cognition/attention deficits (Table 3).
Clinical studies examining cannabis and attention vary depending on what attention the study focused on. The following subsections will review, in more depth, the cognitive effects of cannabis on selective attention, sustained attention, visuospatial attention, attentional bias, and attentional disorders. Please see Table 4 for a more comprehensive summary of the literature.
Selective attention
Böcker and colleagues observed cannabis’ effects on perception and visual selective attention in 24 male individuals who reported smoking at least 2–18 cannabis cigarettes a month [3]. Two hours after smoking cannabis, six event-related potential (ERP) components were recorded at various latencies and scalp positions while individuals performed a visual selective attention task. Participants smoked one of four joints on test days, and as THC concentration increased, reaction times increased and accuracy decreased.
Nicholls and colleagues observed visual selective attention in individuals who use cannabis using a flanker go/no-go task [27]. ERP components were used when individuals performed an attention-related task. Selected participants used cannabis at least weekly in the month prior to the study. Individuals who use cannabis abstained from cannabis for 24 hours prior to testing. Similar to Böcker et al. 2010, the results of the flanker go/no-go task indicated that cannabis slowed reaction times relative to controls, but Nicholls and colleagues did not find a difference in the accuracy of responses. The individuals who used cannabis also showed poorer performance on the component of the task related to executive control, but not on those related to the alerting or orienting networks [27].
Another study regarding visual selective attention in individuals who use cannabis regularly looked at fronto-occipital connectivity using magnetoencephalography (MEG) imaging during a visual selective attention task (SAT) [26]. Those who did not use cannabis had stronger theta activity during certain portions of the task, which was the opposite for those who did. This difference between the groups suggests an altered response to the initial stimuli since theta oscillations are implicated in visual selective attention. The participants who used cannabis exhibited performance within the normal range of the task; therefore, individuals who use cannabis may have a compensatory mechanism to selectively attend to stimuli [26].
Jager and colleagues used a visuo-auditory SAT and fMRI imaging to observe selective attention and active brain regions [30]. To exclude acute pharmacological effects of cannabis use, subjects abstained from cannabis for at least a week before testing. The individuals who frequently used cannabis and controls displayed comparable levels and patterns of overall brain activity in brain regions involved with selective attention during the SAT. Abstinence from cannabis for a week may have caused participants’ brain functioning to return to a level comparable to the controls [30].
Lundqvist and colleagues explored cannabis use’s cognitive consequences in comparison to using stimulants or heroin [34]. The studies within this review paper looked at long-term and short-term cannabis use and its effects on attention and executive functioning. One included study found that long-term cannabis use causes attentional impairments that continue past the period of intoxication [76]. Additionally, attention may worsen with increasing years of regular cannabis use [76].
Sustained Attention
Hart and colleagues explored acute smoked marijuana’s effects on sustained attention [77]. Eighteen participants, who used cannabis chronically and daily, completed baseline computerized cognitive tasks and were given one marijuana cigarette (0%, 1.8%, or 3.9% THC). After smoking the cigarette, participants completed a neuropsychological assessment battery. The results indicated that performance on a tracking task, a measure of sustained attention, significantly improved after the high dose of THC (3.9%). This suggests that chronic daily cannabis smokers may actually have improved sustained attention after smoking a high dose of THC.
Another study investigated synthetic THC’s acute effect on cognitive functioning [78]. Twenty-two healthy male subjects, who were infrequently used cannabis, were intravenously given 2.5 mg THC or a placebo. Psychological assessments were administered before the injection and at 30, 80, and 120 minutes following the injection. Morrison and colleagues found that THC decreased performance on the Digit Span, which measures attention. This suggests that for those with infrequent cannabis use, injected THC produces significant impairments in attention and concentration.
Harvey and colleagues explored how cannabis affects cognition in 70 adolescents who use cannabis [79]. After abstaining from cannabis for 12 hours, participants completed a two-hour interview which included a cognitive test battery. The results indicated that participants who regularly used cannabis had poorer performance than non-regular users on the RVIP task, Digit Span, and the Symbol and Digit Modalities Test. This finding suggests that regular cannabis use impairs sustained attention in adolescents.
Visuospatial Attention
One study examined visual attention to motion stimuli in early-onset cannabis use and non-cannabis use [80]. Individuals who used cannabis abstained from cannabis 24 hours prior to data collection. To measure visual attention, a three-stimuli standard oddball paradigm was used, and EEG activity was recorded continuously. Imaging suggested that those who use cannabis, especially those who began using it at an early age, experience reduced neural activity when attending to motion stimuli.
Attentional Bias
O’Neill and colleagues compiled literature regarding attentional bias towards cannabis cues in individuals who use cannabis [14]. The results showed that there was a greater attentional bias towards cannabis cues in those who use cannabis compared to controls. Experienced individuals who use drugs also displayed an automatic selective attentional orientation toward cannabis-related stimuli that occurs outside of their awareness.
Torrence and colleagues examined cannabis use’s effect on attentional bias towards fearful faces [81]. ERPs were measured during a dot-probe task with fearful and neutral facial expressions to observe cannabis’ residual effects on attentional bias. A reduction in attentional bias was found in those who use cannabis, which is similar to findings in low-anxiety individuals. The decrease in attentional bias could potentially be a mechanism for the anxiolytic effects of cannabis use. Cannabis use was also associated with enhanced N2pc, an ERP component linked to selective attention, which indicates a greater spatial orientation of attention.
Attentional Disorders
Cannabis use at an early age can induce early development of ADHD and schizophrenia, exacerbate symptoms, or produce deficits in attention. One study observed the impact of chronic cannabis use on informational processing in abstinent individuals with a long-term history of cannabis use, both with and without schizophrenia [15]. The study confirms attentional deficits in schizophrenic patients with chronic cannabis use. However, cannabis use may lead to different cognitive sequelae in patients with schizophrenia than healthy controls, which reflects preexisting alterations in the endocannabinoid system in schizophrenia [15]. Blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) activation in the attention network of individuals who use cannabis is altered, which in some regions is reversible with prolonged abstinence [71]. The pattern of findings relates well to the concept that long-term cannabis use exerts neurotoxic effects, which may be partly reversible with prolonged abstinence.
Hollis and colleagues observed whether adolescents with a high genetic risk for schizophrenia were more prone to cannabis’ adverse psychological effects than healthy adolescents with low genetic risk or adolescents with ADHD [6]. Adolescents at high genetic risk for schizophrenia may have a hypersensitive dopaminergic system that increases vulnerability to cannabis-stimulated dopamine release in the mesolimbic system [8]. Dopamine release could attenuate ADHD’s behavioral symptoms by normalizing a hypo-functioning dopamine system [82]. Hollis and colleagues concluded that young adolescents with a high genetic risk of schizophrenia are particularly vulnerable to mental health problems associated with cannabis use, and these mental health problems may differ within the population.
Wallace and colleagues observed the effects of cannabis use and subclinical ADHD symptomatology on attention-based tasks in adolescents and young adults [64]. Subclinical ADHD symptoms may explain attentional deficits in those who use cannabis, with previous research discovering a comorbidity between ADHD and cannabis use [83, 84]. Individuals who use cannabis experience significant attentional deficits compared to their non-using counterparts [85, 86]. Overall, attention deficits are more related to the substance than ADHD symptomatology in those who use cannabis [64].
Pre-Clinical Studies of Cannabis/THC and Attention
Animal models with prenatal THC exposure (PTE) have altered behavior and deficits in attention, the CNS, neurotransmission systems, and psychomotor skills, all of which infer the presence of the equivalent of “mental disorders” in animals [75]. Using a CB1 agonist, WIN 55,212–2, in low or moderate doses also causes alterations in specific systems of the brain, some of which may be permanent [87, 88]. Even low doses of PTE result in atypical locomotor activity, cognitive impairments, altered emotional behavior (such as aggression or anxiety), and enhanced sensitivity to drugs of misuse in adult rodent offspring [13]. Recent studies observing prenatal exposure in rodents demonstrate how rats exposed to cannabis during pregnancy or lactation have an increased likelihood of developing motor hyperactivity and impulsivity, both of which are characteristics of ADHD [89, 90].
Preclinical studies are in line with clinical studies of PTE in that they both show deleterious effects on executive functions in the offspring during childhood and adolescence [13]. Executive functions involve capacities such as cognitive flexibility, sustained and focused attention, and working memory [13]. Deficits in executive functioning caused by PCE are long-lasting [13, 75]. The areas in the brain involved with executive functioning do not fully mature until early adulthood [91]. PCE alters brain development and reduces grey matter in the PFC [92]. Some of these effects from prenatal exposure are also viewed in the mothers who are using cannabis. Both short-term (deficit in attention, executive functioning, coordination, etc.) and long-term effects of cannabis impair the mother’s ability to care for her offspring and consequently, the well-being of the offspring [92].
Paternal cannabis use is also important to consider. Holloway and colleagues found that chronic paternal THC exposure in rats causes changes in sperm methylation, locomotor activity, and attention [93]. THC was subcutaneously administered to male rats at concentrations of 0, 2, or 4 mg/kg THC per day for 28 days prior to mating with drug naïve females. At the 2 mg/kg dose of THC, locomotor hyperactivity was observed in the offspring during adolescence. At this dose, there was also a significant alteration in the sperm, which resulted in long-lasting attentional and behavioral impairments in the offspring relative to controls (see Table 3).
Previous preclinical research has examined the effects of THC and other CB1R agonists on attention in mice and rats (Table 5). One study looked at CB1Rs specifically to see how CB1R activation or inhibition mediated the impairment of visuospatial attention in rats during a lateralized reaction time task (LRT) [94]. Rats were trained to perform the LRT, which measures the ability to detect visual stimuli. After the training period, researchers intraperitoneally injected either a CB1R agonist, WIN 55,212-2 (0–2.5 mg/kg), a CB1R antagonist, SR141716A (0–1.0 mg/kg), or a combination of the two. The CB1R agonist, WIN, disrupted cognition, impaired choice accuracy, and increased reaction times when administered at a dose of 2.5 mg/kg. SR141716A, the CB1R antagonist, did not have any measurable effects, but it prevented impairment caused by WIN (2.5 mg/kg) when they were used in combination.
Another study looked at attention/perception in rats using a 5-choice serial reaction time task (5-CSRTT) after exposure to a CB1R agonist [95]. THC was administered via an ip injection, 30 minutes prior to testing. The ability of THC to slow temporal perception was observed using a discrete-trial temporal discrimination task. Both mice and rats were found to use a temporal mediating strategy while performing the 5-CSRTT. THC slowed premature response time and temporal perception. However, WIN 55,212-2, another CB1R agonist, does not alter premature responding in the 5-CSRTT [96, 97].
Irimia and colleagues observed long-term THC exposure’s effects on impulse control and attentional capacity using ten 14-day cycles of THC dosing and a 5-CSRTT [98]. Each cycle was comprised of 5 days of ip injections of either 0.3 or 3 mg/kg THC followed by 5-the CSRTT during the nine days of abstinence. Researchers continued the 5-CSRTT during five weeks of abstinence. The THC-exposed rats had significantly higher levels of motor impulsivity and behavioral disinhibition compared to drug-naïve controls, in a dose-dependent manner. In rats given THC, increased motor impulsivity and behavioral disinhibition persisted during the five weeks of abstinence, indicating that some deficits associated with cannabis use continue during abstinence.
Verrico and colleagues observed visuospatial attention in rats exposed to repeated, intermittent doses of THC via an ip catheter [99]. Previous studies found that long-term cannabis use in humans causes neurocognitive deficits in attention, cognitive flexibility, and an inability to shift or sustain attention [100]. Three days after the catheter was surgically placed to facilitate drug exposure, the rats were given 10 mg/kg of THC twice daily for 14 days. An LRT was conducted seven days after drug exposure to assess visuospatial attention. Thirteen days after the final dose of THC, rats were given either an amphetamine or saline injection prior to testing. Results showed that THC-exposed rats had impairments in choice accuracy that continued for 14 days after the final dose of THC was administered. Amphetamine allowed THC-exposed rats to perform just as well as the vehicle-treated rats.
Nicotine effects on Attention
Nicotine, a stimulant with anxiolytic properties, improves attention during cognitive tasks compared to non-smoker controls [56, 101]. Attention is reduced, however, in humans and rats prenatally exposed to nicotine [102, 103]. Human offspring prenatally exposed to nicotine may develop attentional disorders like ADHD [104, 105]. Despite this, nicotine may alleviate unwanted attentional problems in those with attentional disorders [106]. It is unknown precisely how attentional circuitry responds to nicotine: there are three attention networks within the brain (Table 1), and nicotine might enhance one or multiple networks while reducing the others. In upcoming subsections, we will review attention types, brain regions involved in attentional processing, and nicotine’s effects on attention, inhibitory control, prefrontal attention circuitry, visuospatial attention, and ADHD.
Prenatal Effects of Nicotine on Attention
Previous clinical and preclinical research has assessed the prenatal effects of nicotine on attention in humans and rodents (Table 6).
Clinical Studies on nicotine and attention
Tiesler and Heinrich summarized findings on PNE’s relationship with behavioral problems in offspring [107]. PNE was related to a higher likelihood of ADHD symptomatology and adverse health effects in newborns, infants, children, adolescents, and adults [108, 109]. PNE leads to altered brain structure and function due to its effects on neurotransmitter systems during brain development [110, 111]. PNE also increases one’s risk for pregnancy complications and preterm delivery, lower birth weight, reduced lung function, asthma, wheezing, airway hyperresponsiveness in children, obstructive lung disease, and accelerated lung aging in later years [112]. Offspring may also be more likely to develop conduct disorder (CD) [113], depression and anxiety [114], hypertension, obesity, cardiovascular disease, and type 2 diabetes [115]. The association between PNE and childhood behavior/cognition problems is due to reduced PFC function, which is also observed in patients with ADHD [116, 117]. The PFC plays an important role in the levels of dopamine and norepinephrine, serotonin, and acetylcholine [117].
Two-hundred preschool children (3–4 years old) prenatally exposed to maternal smoking (not paternal smoking) had an increased risk of ADHD symptoms [118]. Paternal smoking generated an increased risk for maternal SDP. Therefore, it would be effective to offer interventions for both mothers and fathers during the mother’s pregnancy to prevent ADHD-related behavior, symptoms, and diagnosis.
Gatzke-Kopp and Beauchaine investigated direct and passive PNE and the development of externalizing psychopathology [113]. They observed a higher risk for ADHD and CD symptoms in children with PNE and in children whose mother was exposed to environmental tobacco smoke during gestation.
D’Onofrio and colleagues explored genetic and environmental confounds influencing the relationship between SDP and offspring’s risk of developing CD, oppositional defiant disorder (ODD), and ADHD between the ages of 4 and 10 [119]. Researchers compared ADHD traits of siblings with and without PNE to account for familial and genetic effects. Children with PNE had an increased risk of developing ADHD symptoms compared to nonfamilial children without PNE. On the other hand, in siblings who differed in their exposure to maternal SDP, there was no association between SDP and offspring CD and ODD, while the relationship between SDP and ADHD was small and insignificant. This study emphasized that genetic and environmental influences may be at play when determining PNE’s behavioral effects.
Nicotine, as mentioned previously, has some beneficial effects on attention and focus and alters attention in individuals with ADHD. This subsection will review, in more depth, nicotine’s effect on selective attention, sustained attention, visuospatial attention, attentional bias, and attentional disorders. Please see Table 7 for a more comprehensive summary of the literature.
Selective Attention
Wignall and de Wit studied nicotine’s effect on attention and inhibitory control in healthy non-smokers [53]. They administered nicotine to individuals using a 7 mg transdermal nicotine patch, and attention was observed using various tests. Nicotine significantly improved performance when participants performed the Stroop task, but it impaired performance on the orienting aspect of the ANT, which is related to selective attention.
Sustained Attention
One study observed whether transdermal nicotine enhances alertness and attentiveness in non-smokers without attentional deficits [120]. Participants were given either a placebo or a 7 mg transdermal nicotine patch, and attention was assessed. Overall, nicotine significantly improved attention.
Another study examined the effects of transdermal nicotine, distractor type, and dopamine type-2 receptor (DRD2) genotype on RVIP task performance in habitual smokers [121]. DRD2 genotype was chosen for the investigation because dopamine is the neurotransmitter most frequently hypothesized to play an important role in the attention [122, 123]. RVIP task results showed that nicotine enhanced performance in habitual smokers; however, this effect varied with receptor genotype and distractor type. Nicotine significantly improved attention in individuals with a DRD2 A1 genotype.
Kleykamp and colleagues observed nicotine gum’s effects on attention during the ANT in 20 never-smokers [51]. Participants were given either 0 mg, 2 mg, or 4 mg of nicotine. Nicotine did not influence any aspect of attention. Previous studies concluded that orienting and alerting aspects of attention are facilitated by nicotine exposure, whereas the executive function of attention is either enhanced or not affected by nicotine at all [124–128]. The lack of significance may reflect nicotine’s true effect on attention or may be due to the study’s small sample size.
Visuospatial Attention
Lawrence and colleagues observed nicotine’s effect on visual attention in cigarette smokers using a 21 mg transdermal nicotine patch [57]. Transdermal nicotine improved smokers’ visual sustained attention during the RVIP by increasing the activation of posterior cortical and subcortical regions that are related to visual attention and arousal.
Another study found that nicotine enhances visuospatial attention by deactivating areas of the resting brain default network [129]. The spatial attentional resource allocation task (SARAT) was used to observe transdermal nicotine’s effect on long-term smokers’ attention and cognition in comparison to non-nicotine-exposed non-smokers. The SARAT showed that nicotine-induced task-related deactivation in brain regions overlapped with the default network of resting brain function. These deactivations were associated with performance improvements.
Attentional Bias
Baschnagel and colleagues assessed a 7 mg transdermal nicotine patch’s effect on attentional modification of the acoustic startle response in 67 non-smokers [130]. Overall, nicotine improved automatic attentional filtering and increased focused attentional processing in participants who had preexisting low levels of attention. This suggests that nicotine’s effect on attention is more than simply an improvement of withdrawal symptoms.
Attentional Disorders
Poltavski and Petros examined a 7 mg transdermal nicotine patch’s effect on attention in adult non-smokers with and without attentional deficits [106]. Three separate methods were used to observe attention in this study (see Table 7). Nicotine treatment improved the low-attention group’s sustained attention compared to the high-attention group.
Baschnagel and colleagues also studied transdermal nicotine’s effect on non-smoking participants with attentional deficits [130]. A tone discrimination task assessed sustained attention, and it was concluded that nicotine exerted its greatest cognitive-enhancing effects in those who had weak baseline attentional processing.
Bilgi and colleagues assessed the clinical characteristics and smoking profiles of individuals with ADHD, smokers without any documented psychiatric disorders, and healthy controls [131]. Compared to the general population, those with ADHD are more likely to begin smoking at a younger age, have a higher smoking prevalence, and have lower quitting rates [132]. Genetic predispositions to psychosocial vulnerabilities and variants in genes involved in dopaminergic and serotonergic neurotransmission and metabolism contribute to the relationship between ADHD and smoking [133–136]. Nicotine’s ability to improve attention and reduce deficits in dopaminergic function in individuals with inattention and executive dysfunction implies that these are some of the factors that promote smoking in those with ADHD [132, 137]. As a result, smoking represents a form of self-medication against ADHD symptomatology. Bilgi and colleagues concluded that nicotine may act as a positive reinforcer for participants with higher inattention symptoms due to nicotine’s positive effects on arousal and attention.
Another study investigated how transdermal nicotine enhances, but does not normalize, visual sustained attention in smokers with schizophrenia as compared to non-schizophrenic smokers [138]. After transdermal nicotine patches were administered, fMRI and RVIP task results were recorded. Previous research determined that nicotine improves sustained attention in schizophrenic patients [139, 140], so this fMRI study examined the neural basis of this relationship. Nicotine improved RVIP accuracy and processing speed in schizophrenia patients but did not normalize their sustained attention deficit or their abnormal attention network.
Jacobsen and colleagues investigated whether nicotine improves cognition in those with schizophrenia by facilitating the activation of brain regions mediating task performance or facilitating functional connectivity [54]. The results indicated that schizophrenic patients performed more slowly and less accurately compared to controls across task conditions except for the most difficult task condition, in which nicotine improved performance accuracy in patients and worsened performance accuracy in controls.
Another study investigated the relationship between a childhood diagnosis of ADHD with and without ODD and/or comorbid CD (the combination of ODD and CD is CCD), and the later development of psychoactive SUD (PSUD)/alcohol/drug use disorder and/or ND in children and adolescents [63]. Overall, a childhood diagnosis of ADHD is a risk factor for polysubstance use disorder (PSUD) and ND during adolescence. Unaffected siblings are less likely to develop ND compared to their siblings with ADHD. In summary, a childhood diagnosis of ADHD is a risk factor for PSUD and ND in adolescence, and ADHD with CDD but not ODD further increases the risk of PSUD and ND.
Preclinical Studies on nicotine and attention
Zhang and colleagues examined attention and working memory deficits in mice perinatally exposed to oral nicotine [141]. Beginning three weeks before breeding and continuing until three weeks postpartum, female C57BI/6 mice were given nicotine in drinking water that contained saccharin (2%) and 100μg/ml of nicotine. On postnatal day 90, researchers conducted attention and memory tests. Spontaneous locomotor activity was used to assess anxiety and ADHD symptomatology. The results indicated that male mice were more prone to attentional and working memory deficits than female mice.
Another study with similar methods examined PNE’s (administered via 0.06 mg/ml nicotine drinking water) effect on ADHD-like symptoms in adult rats [103]. Using a 5-CSRTT, indicators of attention and impulsivity deficits were observed through reaction times, accuracy errors, omission errors, and anticipatory responses. Nicotine drinking water was given three weeks prior to breeding and continued daily throughout pregnancy. 5-CSRTT results suggested that PNE delays learning in tasks that require high attention. Since the same rat strain was used for the control and experimental groups, genetic variance was controlled; therefore, the results show that PNE was directly responsible for the ADHD-like cognitive changes observed during the 5-CSRTT.
Previous rodent studies have examined the effects of nicotine on attention (Table 8). One study examined how chronic nicotine administration improves attention and how nicotine withdrawal induces performance deficits in the 5-CSRTT [55]. In humans, nicotine enhances attention and cognition, while nicotine withdrawal produces attentional deficits; yet, it is debatable whether nicotine improves performance under baseline conditions or ameliorates attentional deficits. To investigate this effect, Wistar and Sprague Dawley (SD) rats received nicotine via an osmotic minipump. 5-CSRTT results indicated that the Wistar rats performed more accurately than the SD rats. Overall, acute nicotine administration produced small increases in accuracy and impulsivity and decreases in omission errors. Nicotine withdrawal, however, decreased the number of correct responses, increased omissions, and increased latencies to respond.
Hahn and colleagues observed selective nicotinic receptor antagonists’ effects on attention and nicotine-induced attentional enhancement [142]. To determine which nAChR subtype(s) mediate(s) nicotine’s attention-enhancing effects, researchers tested whether the performance-enhancing effects of nicotine in rodent models of attention could be reversed by the α4β2, α4β4, α3β2, and α2β2 nAChR antagonist dihydro-β-erythroidine (DHβE) or the α7 antagonist methyl lycaconitine (MLA). Rats performed a 5-CSRTT after being injected with nicotine (0.1 mg/kg) or vehicle in the presence of increasing doses of DhβE (0.0, 0.3, 1, and 3 mg/kg) or MLA (0.0, 0.4, 1.3, and 4 mg/kg). This study yielded three main findings (see Table 8). Overall, nAChR subtypes are differentially involved in specific aspects of attention, which implies that a fine-tuned adjustment may be achievable with subtype-selective nicotinic compounds.
Counotte and colleagues observed lasting synaptic changes underlying attentional deficits caused by nicotine exposure during adolescence [48]. Nicotine interferes with PFC development and leads to cognitive impairments later in life, so researchers focused on the PFC [143–145]. Researchers exposed adolescent rats to nicotine vapor and assessed visuospatial attention, protein expression, and synaptic physiology in the PFC during adulthood. Nicotine treatment during adolescence increased impulsive behavior and impaired measures of attention in adulthood after five weeks of abstinence. Adolescent nicotine exposure induced lasting attentional disturbances, reduced mGluR2 protein, and reduced mGluR2 function on presynaptic terminals of PFC glutamatergic synapses.
Conclusion.
In summary, cannabis and nicotine remain two of the most commonly used substances in the United States, with many individuals using both substances. Cannabis (and more specifically, THC) and nicotine impact attention, albeit by different mechanisms. THC, the main psychoactive component of cannabis, binds to CB1Rs in areas of the brain responsible for attention, producing deficits over time in the attention networks within the human brain [65] and impaired measures of attention in rodents [94, 95, 98, 99] PCE is linked to attention problems and the onset of ADHD symptomatology in the offspring [75]. Paternal cannabis use is important to consider alongside maternal use since THC alters methylation of rat sperm DNA [93]. In contrast to cannabis/THC, nicotine improves attention for non-smokers with pre-existing low attention [106, 130], non-smokers without pre-existing attentional impairments [120], and those who are current cigarette smokers [57, 121]. Due to nicotine’s enhancement of attention, smokers with lower than normal attention, such as those with ADHD and schizophrenia, may use nicotine-containing products as a form of self-medication [131, 138]. Although nicotine improves attention, PNE impairs attention in both humans [24, 108, 109, 113, 118, 119, 146] and rodents [103, 141].
Since ROA may be important when determining cannabis and nicotine’s effects on attention, future research should investigate how different ROAs impact attention-related outcomes in both preclinical and clinical models. Additionally, there is much uncertainty about how prenatal nicotine and/or cannabis affect the alerting, orienting, and executive control attention networks in the brain, so this should be further explored. Lastly, the combined effect of cannabis/THC and tobacco/nicotine on attention should be further investigated, since most studies have focused on each substance alone. Currently, research suggests that nicotine masks cognitive impairment from cannabis since these substances have opposing effects on cognition [147]; there, it is reasonable to hypothesize that nicotine may mask attentional impairments induced by cannabis. Despite this information, no studies to our knowledge specifically investigated the effect of cannabis and nicotine co-use on attention.