INTRODUCTION
Despite decreases in cigarette smoking in the past several decades, tobacco use remains one of the leading causes of preventable disease and death in the United States (US).1,2 In 2021, approximately one in five US adults (18.7%, 46 million) reported current use (every-day or some-day use) of any tobacco product.3 Cigarettes are the most commonly used tobacco product, and e-cigarettes are the second most prevalent tobacco product used by US adults.3 While e-cigarettes are often used as an alternative to cigarette smoking,4 persistent use of e-cigarettes may be associated with adverse health outcomes, including nicotine dependence and respiratory and psychiatric problems.5,6 Therefore, it is important to identify factors that inhibit or increase nicotine abstinence among people who regularly use any nicotine product.
Nicotine and cannabis use often co-occur and are intertwined.7 Although they can be co-administered in the same product (e.g., simultaneous use of nicotine and cannabis, such as in blunts and spliffs), co-use commonly involves use of both drugs on different occasions in a common time frame (e.g., past 30-day use of both nicotine and cannabis).7 The prevalence of past-year cannabis use among people who smoke cigarettes in the US was nearly 30% in 2018.8 Cannabis use among people who use e-cigarettes is also prevalent – co-use of e-cigarettes and cannabis among young adults is more common than exclusive e-cigarette use.9,10 There are also increasing reports of individuals using cannabis as a substitute for cigarette smoking or e-cigarette use to reduce or quit nicotine use.11 However, most epidemiologic studies describing co-use of nicotine and cannabis are cross-sectional, which limits the ability to identify individuals who recently switched from nicotine to cannabis use. Thus, the prevalence of using cannabis as a substitute for nicotine at the national level is poorly understood.
Evidence on the association of cannabis use with nicotine abstinence has revealed mixed results.12 Earlier clinical studies involving smoking-cessation treatment-seeking adults found positive,13-15 inverse,16 or no associations of cannabis use with smoking cessation.17 Recent human randomized controlled studies have shown cannabidiol (CBD) use was associated with reduced number of cigarettes smoked18 and reduced salience/pleasantness of cigarette cues.19 However, CBD is a non-intoxicating cannabinoid, and findings of CBD studies may not generalize to the current market of high potency psychoactive tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) cannabis products.20 Epidemiologic studies have generally found inverse associations between cannabis use and smoking cessation among national, 21-23 international,24 and regional patient samples25 of adults who smoke cigarettes. However, few prior studies examine the association of cannabis use with e-cigarette use cessation. Additionally, prior epidemiologic studies assessed cannabis use at a single time point, which does not allow for distinguishing between individuals who recently switched to cannabis use versus those who are engaging in co-use. It is important to understand how different patterns of cannabis use affect nicotine use abstinence to inform clinical and/or community interventions, including whether concurrent co-use and/or substituting cannabis for nicotine inhibits longer-term nicotine abstinence.
The current study used national cohort data (2013-2021) to examine the association of nicotine–cannabis use transitions with subsequent nicotine abstinence. The primary aim was to examine four possible transitions from exclusive nicotine use to (1) exclusive cannabis use, (2) nicotine–cannabis co-use, (3) non-use of both products, and (4) exclusive nicotine use, and to test associations of transitions with nicotine abstinence at an approximately 1-year follow-up among a sample of US adults who reported cigarette and/or e-cigarette use, and did not use cannabis prior to baseline.
METHODS
Data source
Data were from six consecutive waves of the Population Assessment of Tobacco and Health (PATH) Study (Wave 1: September 2013-December 2014; Wave 2: October 2014-October 2015; Wave 3: October 2015- October 2016; Wave 4: December 2016-January 2018; Wave 5: December 2018-November 2019; Wave 6: March 2021-November 2021). The PATH Study is a large nationally representative prospective cohort study of non-institutionalized US adolescents (12–17 years) and adults (18 years or older). PATH participants complete home-based computer-assisted personal interviews approximately 12 months apart. A four-stage stratified area probability sampling design is used in PATH, oversampling people who use tobacco/nicotine products, young adults, and African American individuals. Details of PATH were described previously.26 This study used the de-identified adult public-use files. The WESTAT Institutional Review Board obtained informed consent for participation.
Study design and participants
This study employed a stacked (i.e., nested trial) design to examine the association of four possible nicotine–cannabis transitions between time t and t+1 with nicotine abstinence at t+2, simultaneously across four time-intervals.27-29 Data were restructured long-form in which each observation corresponded to an interval of three consecutive waves occurring approximately 12-months apart – Interval 1 = W1(t), W2(t+1), W3(t+2); Interval 2 = W2(t), W3(t+1), W4(t+2); Interval 3 = W3(t), W4(t+1), W5(t+2); and Interval 4 = W4(t), W5(t+1), W6(t+2). The first wave in each interval (pre-baseline, time t) provided information about current and prior nicotine and cannabis use and confounders; the second wave in each interval (baseline, t+1) was the exposure measurement period (i.e., defined the nicotine–cannabis use transition between t and t+1); the third wave in each interval (follow-up, t+2) was the outcome measurement period (i.e., nicotine abstinence).
The analytic sample included participants who reported current established cigarette smoking and/or current established e-cigarette use, and who did not use cannabis in the past 12 months pre-baseline (exclusive nicotine use at the first wave in each interval). We focused solely on cigarette and e-cigarette use because exclusive use of other nicotine products (e.g., cigar/pipe, smokeless tobacco) without cigarette and/or e-cigarette use is rare (<1%).30 PATH defined current established cigarette smoking as having smoked >100 cigarettes in one’s lifetime, and currently smoking cigarettes every day or some days.28 Current established e-cigarette use was defined as having ever used e-cigarettes fairly regularly, and currently using e-cigarettes every day or some days.29 Past 12-month cannabis use pre-baseline (for exclusion) included using marijuana/tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and/or smoking a cigar/cigarillo/filtered cigar containing marijuana (i.e., blunt use). The analytic sample was further restricted to participants who had completed all three consecutive waves in at least one interval and had non-missing data for exposure, outcome, and all-wave sampling weights (n=6,309 for interval 1, n=5,312 for interval 2, n=4,644 for interval 3, and n=3,353 for interval 4). The final analytic sample included 8,382 unique participants with 19,618 observations (Figure 1). Participants who were excluded from the analysis due to missing data on the exposure, outcome, or weight variables (n=485, 2.4%) did not largely differ from the analytic sample on sociodemographic, substance use, mental health, and nicotine use characteristics (eTable 1).
Measures
Exposure: nicotine–cannabis use transition
Exposure was a time-varying, four-category nicotine–cannabis use transition variable consisting of four possible transitions between t and t+1 (i.e., the first and second wave of each interval), from exclusive nicotine use to (1) exclusive cannabis use, (2) nicotine–cannabis co-use, (3) non-use of both products, (4) persistent exclusive nicotine use. Nicotine product use indicates current established cigarette28 and/or e-cigarette use (as described above).29 We defined cannabis use as past 30-day use of marijuana/THC (assessed with the question, “How long has it been since you last used marijuana, hash, THC, grass, pot, or weed?”). We did not include blunt use in the definition of cannabis use because a past 30-day measure was not available.
Outcome: nicotine abstinence
The outcome was nicotine abstinence at time t+2 (abstinence vs non-abstinence), assessed approximately 1 year after the end of the two-wave exposure transition sequence and defined as no current use (either every day or some days) of both cigarettes and e-cigarettes at the time of the survey.
Covariates
This study incorporated covariates associated with cannabis use, nicotine use, and nicotine abstinence that could potentially confound associations.31-33 All covariates were measured at pre-baseline (t) for each interval. Sociodemographic characteristics included sex (male vs. female), sexual orientation (heterosexual vs. sexual minority identity[lesbian, gay, bisexual, something else]), race (White, Black, or another race), ethnicity (Hispanic vs. non-Hispanic), and household income (<$10,000, $10,000-$24,999, $25,000-$49,999, $50,000-$99,999, ≥$100,000). Other tobacco use (single variable) included current established cigar (traditional cigar, cigarillo, filtered cigar), pipe, hookah, smokeless tobacco, snus, and/or dissolvable tobacco use. Substance use covariates consisted of past 30-day binge drinking (≥4 drinks for female and ≥5 drinks for male respondents on the same occasion) and past 30-day use of illicit drugs, including cocaine/crack, hallucinogens, heroin, inhalants, solvents, and/or methamphetamine/speed. We included two mental health measures of past-year internalizing and externalizing symptoms assessed using the Global Appraisal of Individual Needs–Short Screener (GAIN-SS). Following the categorization established in the literature,34,35 we dichotomized internalizing and externalizing problems into none/low/moderate versus high. We included two nicotine use status measures: (1) type of nicotine used (exclusive smoking, exclusive vaping, or dual use of cigarettes and e-cigarettes), and (2) daily nicotine use status (daily use vs. non-daily use). Motivation to quit nicotine use at the time of the survey was assessed based on level of interest in quitting smoking/using nicotine products (range 1-10). We used a psychometrically valid scale of nicotine dependence developed from multiple survey items (e.g., Wisconsin Inventory of Smoking Dependence Motives, Nicotine Dependence Syndrome Scale).31,36,37
Statistical analysis
We examined the distribution of pre-baseline (t) covariates overall and by nicotine–cannabis transitions at t+1 and examined the weighted prevalence of nicotine abstinence at t+2 by nicotine–cannabis transitions at t+1.
We fitted sample-weighted modified Poisson regression models to assess the association of nicotine–cannabis use transitions at t+1 with nicotine abstinence at t+2. To account for repeated measures within participants, generalized linear mixed modeling (GLMM) with a random intercept was used. Models adjusted for time (i.e., interval) and all aforementioned pre-baseline (t) covariates. We fitted modified log-link Poisson regression models and reported relative risks (RRs) with the corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs).38 We evaluated non-use of both nicotine and cannabis and exclusive nicotine use as separate reference groups in separate models.39
In a sensitivity analysis, we redefined cannabis use at t+1 as any past 12-month use to capture any past-year cannabis use regardless of current use at baseline (t); we included blunt use for this sensitivity analysis. Given different implications for nicotine dependence and health outcomes for e-cigarette versus cigarette use,40 we repeated the primary analysis stratified by people who exclusively smoked cigarettes versus e-cigarettes. We did not repeat the main analysis among participants who reported dual use of cigarettes and e-cigarettes because of model convergence issues. In addition, non-daily nicotine use is a distinct behavior from daily nicotine use; we repeated the main analysis stratifying by daily versus non-daily nicotine use. Finally, because transitions from cigarette smoking to exclusive e-cigarette use may reduce harm, we examined the weighted prevalence of exclusive e-cigarette use at t+2 among adults who smoked cigarettes pre-baseline.
This study incorporated sampling weights for all analyses and used the balanced repeated replication method with Fay adjustment (Fay’s rho=0.3) for descriptive analyses. We used sample weights corresponding to the follow-up wave in the interval (e.g., interval 1 used W3 adult all-waves weights, interval 4 used W6 all-waves weights). Missing covariate data were imputed using multiple imputation with chained equations (MICE) (five imputed data sets created via 40 iterations for each set).41 Multicollinearity concerns were negligible (generalized variance inflation factor<2). We used R version 4.2.3 with the lme4 and survey packages for analyses.
RESULTS
Descriptive analyses
Table 1 depicts the sample characteristics of 8,382 U.S. adults (19,618 observations) who reported established cigarette smoking and/or e-cigarette use pre-baseline (t) with no use of cannabis in the past 12 months, stratified by subsequent nicotine–cannabis transition at t+1. Over 80% (n=15,915) continued exclusive nicotine use at time t+1, with 9% transitioning to non-use of both nicotine and cannabis (n=1,811), 9% nicotine–cannabis co-use (n=1,711), and 1% exclusive cannabis use (n=181). Overall, 10% stopped using nicotine after approximately one year at t+1, among whom 9% had switched to cannabis use.
Prevalence of transition to nicotine–cannabis co-use was highest among participants who were young adults (18-24 years; 15%), sexual minority (13%), Black race (9%), and those who reported household income between $10,000-24,999 (10%), other tobacco (10%) and substance use (18%), internalizing (11%) or externalizing mental health symptoms (13%), dual use of cigarettes and e-cigarettes (12%), and daily nicotine use (8%). Prevalence of transition to exclusive cannabis use was highest among participants who were young adults (18-24 years; 3%), sexual minority (1%), or another race (1%), and participants who reported a household income of ≥$100,000 (2%), other tobacco use (1%), and externalizing symptoms (2%).
Table 2 presents the weighted prevalence of nicotine abstinence at t+2, which was 72% among participants who transitioned to exclusive cannabis use at t+1, 65% among participants who transitioned to non-use of both nicotine and cannabis, 10% among participants who continued exclusive nicotine use, and 6% among participants who transitioned to nicotine–cannabis co-use at t+1.
Nicotine–cannabis use transitions and nicotine abstinence
As shown in Table 3, compared to transitioning to non-use of both nicotine and cannabis at t+1, continuation of exclusive nicotine use (aRR=0.21, 95%CI=0.19-0.23) and transition to nicotine–cannabis co-use (aRR=0.14, 95%CI=0.11-0.17) were associated with lower likelihood of later nicotine abstinence at t+2—one wave after the end of the exposure transition sequence. Transition to exclusive cannabis use at t+1 (vs. transitioning to non-use of both products by t+1) was not associated with subsequent nicotine abstinence at t+2 in adjusted models (aRR=0.98, 95%CI=0.81-1.2).
When the exposure reference category was switched to the continuation of exclusive nicotine use at t+1, transition to nicotine–cannabis co-use was inversely associated with nicotine abstinence at t+2 (aRR=0.68, 95%CI=0.55-0.83). Transitions to non-use of both products (aRR=4.8, 95%CI=4.4-5.2) and exclusive cannabis use (aRR=4.7, 95%CI=3.8-5.7) were each positively associated with subsequent nicotine abstinence compared to continuation of exclusive nicotine use.
Sensitivity analyses
In models replacing past 30-day cannabis use at t+1 with past 12-month cannabis use, associations were similar to primary results (eTable 2). Results were similar when restricted to individuals who exclusively smoked cigarettes pre-baseline; however, among individuals who exclusively used e-cigarettes pre-baseline, the inverse association of transitioning to nicotine–cannabis co-use (vs. exclusive nicotine use) attenuated (aRR=0.98, 95%CI=0.55-1.8) (eTable 3). When stratifying by daily versus non-daily nicotine use (eTable 4), the positive association of transition to exclusive cannabis use (vs. exclusive nicotine use) with follow-up nicotine abstinence was stronger among individuals who used nicotine daily pre-baseline (aRR=8.4, 95%CI=6.1-11) than non-daily (aRR=2.9, 95%CI=2.3-3.8); in contrast, the inverse association of transitioning to nicotine–cannabis co-use (vs. maintaining exclusive nicotine use) with follow-up nicotine abstinence was slightly stronger among individuals who used nicotine non-daily (aRR=0.50, 95%CI=0.34-0.74) than daily (aRR=0.79, 95%CI=0.62-1.0). Among cigarette smokers at baseline (t) who reported continued nicotine use at t+2, 4.1% had transitioned to exclusive e-cigarette use (eTable 5).
DISCUSSION
The current study examined the association of nicotine–cannabis use transitions at baseline with nicotine abstinence at follow-up in a national sample of US adults. Our study extends the existing literature by distinguishing individuals who recently switched to cannabis use from those engaging in current co-use, utilizing a stacked, long-term prospective study design (2013–2021), and conducting sensitivity analyses to demonstrate the robustness of findings. Findings revealed heterogeneity in the association of cannabis use with nicotine abstinence. Adults who transitioned to co-use of nicotine and cannabis had 32% lower probability of nicotine abstinence than those who continued to use nicotine exclusively. Conversely, switching from exclusive nicotine use to exclusive cannabis use was associated with a similar probability of sustained nicotine abstinence relative to adults who transitioned to non-use of both drugs; that is, switching from nicotine to cannabis use compared to discontinuing the use of nicotine without cannabis use did not confer any additional benefit or harm for long-term nicotine use abstinence.
Several mechanisms may explain an inverse association of co-use of nicotine and cannabis with nicotine abstinence observed in the current and previous studies 21-25 First, evidence suggests the existence of a functional interaction between nicotine and cannabis whereby the two substances work together to increase risk of drug dependence. For example, an in vivo study suggested the facilitation of cannabis-induced pharmacological and behavioral responses and physical dependence by nicotine may play a significant role in development of addictive process.42 Thus, nicotine–cannabis co-use (vs. nicotine alone) might accelerate greater potential for nicotine use. Second, nicotine withdrawal symptoms, including cognitive declines43,44 and worsened mental health44 may be more severe among individuals concurrently using both cannabis and nicotine compared to exclusive nicotine use, impeding nicotine abstinence.45 Third, behavioral cues through inhaling cannabis could normalize the continued act of smoking cigarettes; this may be particularly true in cases of common routes of administration (e.g., smoking cannabis).46,47 Smoking is the most common route of administration for cannabis use among US adults,48 and approximately 85% of participants in this study exclusively smoked cigarettes pre-baseline. Notably, the inverse association of nicotine–cannabis co-use with nicotine abstinence appeared stronger among individuals who exclusively smoked cigarettes versus exclusive vaping, which might be attributed to behavioral cues through common routes of administration.
While co-use of nicotine and cannabis may prevent nicotine abstinence, completely switching to exclusive cannabis use might not impede quitting nicotine. Exclusive cannabis use may aid in nicotine abstinence by serving as a social and/or behavioral substitute for inhalable nicotine.49 While cannabis use may worsen certain nicotine withdrawal symptoms (e.g., cognitive decline), switching to cannabis use may reduce other nicotine withdrawal symptoms, such as insomnia, stress, or irritability.50-53 We found that the positive association of exclusive cannabis use with nicotine abstinence was stronger among individuals who used nicotine daily pre-baseline (vs. nondaily). Those who are using nicotine daily may have greater pre-baseline nicotine dependence and might particularly benefit from the substitution effects of cannabis in their nicotine cessation attempts. However, cannabis is an addictive substance that may pose its own health risks, particularly to respiratory54,55 and/or cardiovascular health,56 and cannabis use might increase the risk of smoking relapse.57 Importantly, clinical evidence supporting cannabis as a method for quitting nicotine use is limited.58 Additionally, rates of transition to exclusive cannabis use were low (<1%) in our nationally representative sample. Therefore, the population-level impact of cannabis substitution with nicotine abstinence remains unclear.
This study has limitations. A single assessment of nicotine and cannabis use within a 1-year time frame may not be sufficient to examine the dynamic association of nicotine–cannabis transitions with nicotine abstinence. All measures were self-reported and there may be misclassification of nicotine and cannabis use behaviors. PATH does not measure cannabis use frequency and only recently added a measure of past 30-day cannabis vaping beginning in wave 6, precluding our ability to examine whether the association of nicotine–cannabis transitions differed based on frequency or type of cannabis product (e.g., cannabis vaping vs. smoking vs. edible). Relatedly, the PATH study does not measure past 30-day blunt use, limiting this study to only include blunt use in a sensitivity analysis. There may be residual confounding by unmeasured variables (e.g., environmental and genetic risk factors).59 Differential attrition might have induced selection bias. However, the weighting process accounted for nonresponses, minimizing the potential for selection bias and preserving sample representativeness.
In this nationally representative cohort of US adults, we found divergent associations of cannabis use with nicotine abstinence based on different patterns of nicotine–cannabis transitions. Transition to nicotine–cannabis co-use after one-year (vs. exclusive nicotine use) was associated with lower nicotine abstinence, while transition to exclusive cannabis use (vs. nonuse of either product) resulted in a similar probability of nicotine abstinence. The legalization and commercialization of cannabis continues to expand across the US, and cannabis use is at an all-time high and is increasing among adults who use tobacco products.8,60 Our findings highlight the complexity of the association of cannabis use with nicotine abstinence, and the importance of distinguishing between individuals who recently switched to cannabis use versus those who are engaging in concurrent co-use in studies examining the association of cannabis use with nicotine cessation.
Supplementary Material