Introduction
Cannabis is the most widely used illicit substance globally.1 With increasing legalization and availability, use is rising.1 While many individuals use cannabis without major consequences, 10% to 30% of regular users develop cannabis use disorder (CUD), characterized by persistent use despite negative consequences, including mental ill health (eg, low mood, anxiety, apathy) and cognitive impairments (eg, impaired learning and memory). These adverse effects are linked to cannabis-induced structural and functional alterations in the hippocampus.2
The hippocampus is particularly susceptible to prolonged cannabis exposure.3 Neuroimaging studies have linked CUD to reductions in hippocampal integrity (eg, structure, connectivity, biochemistry).3,4 As a critical region for learning, memory, and emotional processing,5 hippocampal integrity is functionally related to many of the brain-based symptoms of CUD, including poor verbal learning and memory, mood disturbances, anxiety, and apathy.6 Despite these consequences, no interventions currently target hippocampal integrity in CUD.
Cardiovascular exercise, particularly high-intensity interval training (HIIT), is a potent modulator of neuroplasticity and hippocampal integrity.7 HIIT induces significant blood lactate production, which crosses the blood-brain barrier to stimulate brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF),8 a key regulator of neuronal growth and connectivity. Evidence suggests HIIT can enhance hippocampal volume, connectivity, and function in healthy and clinical populations.9 Cardiovascular exercise can also reduce craving, a predictor of relapse,10 in substance use disorders and improve cognition impairments that complicate treatment adherence. However, its effects on individuals with CUD remain unexplored.
Few studies have precisely tailored exercise interventions to target specific physiological mechanisms (ie, low vs high lactate exposure) or comprehensively assessed hippocampal integrity using multimodal imaging. Adherence to exercise interventions in substance-using populations is also challenging, necessitating a behaviorally informed approach. Supervised, group-based interventions led by exercise professionals may optimize engagement and offer valuable insights into the impact of exercise on CUD.
This trial examined the effects of a 12-week HIIT intervention (high lactate exposure) vs strength and resistance (SR) training (low lactate exposure) on hippocampal integrity in people with moderate to severe CUD. The hypothesis was that 12 weeks of HIIT would produce greater improvements in hippocampal integrity than SR training, offering a novel, behaviorally informed approach to addressing neurobiological deficits in CUD.
Methods
Trial Design
This randomized clinical trial (NCT04902092) using a 1:1 ratio (stratified by dependence severity, age, and gender) and a parallel design was approved by the Monash University Human Research Ethics Committee (Figure 1). (See Supplement 1 for the full trial protocol.) Participants were blind to the hypothesized superiority of HIIT but not to exercise condition. All participants provided written informed consent. This article adheres to the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) and Template for Intervention Description and Replication (TIDieR) reporting guidelines for improved reporting of randomized trials of nonpharmacological treatments. The trial was conducted from 2018 to 2022 and the data analysis from September 2022 to February 2023.
Procedure Timeline and Study Flow Diagram
A, After the screening procedures and baseline assessment, participants attended 36 high-intensity interval training (HIIT) or strength and resistance (SR) training sessions over 12 weeks, followed by the end point assessments. B, Participant numbers and disposition through the course of the trial.
Participants
Inclusion criteria included moderate to severe CUD, age 20 to 55 years, and a significant history of cannabis use (more than 3 days per week for 4 of the past 6 years). Exclusion criteria included significant polysubstance use, comorbid mental illness, or contraindication to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET), or regular physical exercise.
Intervention
Both exercise conditions involved three 45-minute sessions per week for 12 weeks. Participants wore a heart rate monitor so accredited exercise physiologists could adjust exercise intensity in real time based on individual needs. The HIIT protocol was designed to increase lactate exposure, while SR sessions aimed to minimize it (eFigures 1-6, eTables 3-5, and the eMethods in the Supplement 2 and eTables 1 and 2 in Supplement 3). Accredited exercise physiologists provided motivational support tailored to participants’ barriers and facilitators to maximize adherence.
Outcome Measures
All outcomes were collected at baseline and within 1 week of concluding the intervention. The primary outcome was left hippocampal integrity, a composite of hippocampal volume, fractional anisotropy, and N-acetylaspartate obtained on a 3-Tesla Siemens Skyra MRI scanner (eFigure 7 in Supplement 2).
Secondary Outcomes
Secondary outcome measures assessed cannabis use (craving, consumption, dependence), cognition (visual learning and memory, paired associate learning), mental health (apathy, anxiety, depression, resilience, well-being, quality of life, sleep), physical activity, and cardiorespiratory fitness using validated measures.
Statistical Analysis
Analyses were performed using SPSS version 26.0 (IBM). Intent-to-treat and per-protocol analyses were conducted. Main effects and group × time interactions were assessed using generalized estimating equations. Covariates included age, gender, age of regular cannabis use, and cannabis consumption (grams). The α was 2-sided and set at .01.
Results
Fifty-nine participants completed the baseline assessment. The mean (SD) age was 27.0 (6.3) years (range, 20-53 years); 47 participants (80%) were male and 12 (20%) female (eTable 4 in Supplement 2). Forty-seven completed the intervention (79.7%), attending 80% of exercise sessions. The HIIT group spent significantly more time exercising above 70% of maximum heart rate (HRmax) (U = 231.5, z = −2.79; P = .005), 80% HRmax (U = 121.5, z = −4.54; P < .001), 90% HRmax (U = 88.5, z = −5.10; P < .001), and the lactate threshold (U = 172.0, z = −3.74; P < .001) (Figure 2). Mean exercise engagement increased significantly from baseline to end point, regardless of condition (Wald χ2 = 5.199; P = .02) (Figure 2). No change in maximum oxygen consumption (V̇o2max) was seen in the intent-to-treat analysis; however, the per-protocol analysis revealed a greater increase in V̇o2max for the HIIT group vs the SR group (Figure 2).
Exercising Time, Engagement, and Exertion in the High-Intensity Interval Training (HIIT) and Strength and Resistance (SR) Training Groups
A, Time spent exercising above 70%, 80%, and 90% of maximum heart rate (HRmax) and lactate threshold (LT). B, Change in mean exercise engagement per week (metabolic equivalent [MET] minutes) for participants in the HIIT and SR groups from baseline to end point (intent to treat). C, Change in maximum oxygen consumption (V̇o2max) for participants in the HIIT and SR groups from baseline to end point (per protocol). Error bars represent standard error; dashed lines and shading indicate 95% CIs.
aP < .01.
bP < .001.
Primary Outcome
Hippocampal integrity did not increase after 12 weeks of HIIT (estimated marginal means [EMM] [SE], −0.14 [0.43] at baseline; EMM [SE], 0.10 [0.45] after intervention) or SR training (EMM [SE], 0.38 [0.37] at baseline; EMM [SE], −0.16 [0.37] after intervention), when hippocampal integrity was examined as a composite or by individual components (Figure 3A and eTables 6 and 7 in Supplement 2).
Estimated Marginal Means (EMM) for Participants From Generalized Estimating Equation (GEE) Regression on Primary and Secondary Outcome Measures
A, EMM for participants in the high-intensity interval training (HIIT) and strength and resistance (SR) training groups from corresponding intent-to-treat (ITT) GEE regression on hippocampal integrity, left hippocampal volume, N-acetylaspartate, and fractional anisotropy. B, EMM for participants in the HIIT and SR groups from corresponding ITT GEE regressions on substance use, mental health, and verbal and visual memory function. Error bars represent standard error; dashed lines and shading indicate 95% CIs. Cannabis dependence was assessed by Severity of Dependence Scale; consumption, timeline follow-back procedure; craving, Penn Cannabis Craving Scale; depression, Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology; anxiety, State-Trait Anxiety Inventory–state anxiety scale; apathy, Apathy Evaluation Scale; visual learning and memory, paired associate learning; and verbal learning and memory, Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test.
Secondary Outcomes
Per-protocol analysis revealed a significant reduction in craving for both conditions (Wald χ2 = 6.04; P = .01). No other secondary outcome measures changed (Figure 3B and eTables 8-10 and eFigures 8-11 in Supplement 2).
Discussion
This randomized clinical trial investigated whether HIIT improves hippocampal integrity in people with CUD. Contrary to expectations, HIIT did not enhance hippocampal integrity, cognitive function, or mental health over time or compared with SR training, despite high engagement and a behaviorally and physiologically informed intervention design. The lack of effect over time may stem from cannabis-related neurobiological alterations, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) accumulation within neurons, altered cannabinoid receptor signaling, and vascular and dendritic impairments. Continued cannabis use during the trial may have interfered with exercise-induced neuroplasticity. Animal studies suggest THC reduces BDNF expression, a key driver of hippocampal neuroplasticity.11 As such, abstinence may be necessary to observe meaningful neurobiological changes.
It is also possible that both HIIT and SR training conferred benefits that may have reduced detectable differences between groups, as supported by an association between training frequency and hippocampal volume and fractional anisotropy that is independent of training condition. SR training is known to enhance neurotrophic factors and brain health, potentially mitigating the expected superiority of HIIT. Additionally, maintaining hippocampal integrity amid ongoing cannabis use and pandemic-related stressors may reflect a protective effect of exercise. Future research should investigate whether exercise prevents the decline of hippocampal integrity in people who continue to consume cannabis using a waitlist or inactive control condition.
Both interventions reduced cannabis craving, a known predictor of relapse, over time, supporting previous research on the role of exercise in addiction treatment.12,13 Potential mechanisms include shared activation of reward pathways and improved mood and stress regulation. Engagement was exceptionally high, with 80% adherence, surpassing previous addiction-related exercise interventions.13 The supervised, group-based structure likely contributed to this success. Future studies should examine whether exercise enhances hippocampal integrity when combined with abstinence strategies.
Limitations
Trial limitations include an overrepresentation of male participants, small sample size, and COVID-19 disruptions. In addition, conclusions are specific to the 12-week trial duration. Nonetheless, this trial highlights exercise as a promising strategy to reduce cannabis craving, with further research needed to explore gender differences and determine its effects on hippocampal integrity after abstinence.
Conclusions
This trial found that a 12-week HIIT intervention did not improve hippocampal integrity or associated cognitive or mental health impairments while people continued to consume cannabis. However, results indicated that people with CUD can engage in regular physical exercise programs and highlighted exercise as a potential strategy to reduce cannabis craving.