Introduction: Epidemiology of Cannabis Use Disorder
Current patterns of cannabis use
Cannabis is one of the most commonly used addictive drugs, with 2.5% of the global population reporting past-year use [1]. In the United States (U.S.), 47% of individuals aged 12 years or older reported lifetime cannabis use [2]. Although at present (2025), cannabis remains a federally illicit substance in the U.S. under the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 39 states have legalized medicinal use, and 24 of these states have also legalized recreational (“adult”) use. These policy changes parallel long-term trends in cannabis use within the U.S. Between 1992 and 2022, the number of individuals reporting daily or near-daily use (defined as use on 21 or more days in the past month) increased 15-fold from 0.9 million to 17.7 million [3]. While most individuals do not develop clinically significant problems related to their cannabis use, a subset engages in patterns of chronic, heavy use which increases the risk of more psychosocial and behavioral consequences and developing a cannabis use disorder (CUD) [4–8]. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) defines CUD as the presence of clinically significant impairment or distress evidenced by at least two of the 11 criteria, such as using cravings, withdrawal symptoms, and using larger amounts than intended, within a 12-month period [9].
In the U.S., 19.4 million people reported past-year CUD [2], and 16.5% of individuals with CUD received past-year substance use treatment [10]. This low engagement in treatment may be attributed to several barriers including over-confidence in the ability to stop on one’s own, minimization of problems associated with cannabis use, stigma surrounding SUDs, and limited awareness of available treatment options [11]. Among those seeking treatment, evidence-based behavioral and psychotherapies, including cognitive behavioral therapy [12,13], motivational enhancement therapy [14], motivational interviewing [15], and contingency management [16–19] have shown effectiveness in reducing cannabis use, yet most individuals relapse to regular cannabis use and are unable to achieve sustained abstinence [20].
To date, there are no Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved medications for CUD and developing efficacious pharmacotherapy remains a goal of researchers and clinicians in the field of addiction treatment. Several promising pharmacological agents for CUD have been examined including cannabinoid type 1 (CB1) receptor agonists (e.g., dronabinol, nabilone, nabiximols), a signaling specific inhibitor of CB1 receptors, fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) inhibitors, as well as non-cannabinoid medications (e.g., naltrexone, quetiapine, varenicline). A recent study examining treatment preferences among individuals who use cannabis found that 80% favored a combination of medication and behavioral therapy [21], supporting the importance of this avenue of research. As the rates of cannabis use and CUD continue to rise, there is a clear need for diverse treatment options that include safe and effective pharmacotherapies.
Neurobiology of Cannabis
Cannabis is often categorized as Δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-dominant or cannabidiol (CBD)-dominant, but it also contains other cannabinoids, as well as volatile oils or terpenes, which impart distinct odors and flavors [22,23]. THC is the primary cannabinoid of interest in this chapter as it is the main psychoactive component of cannabis and is associated with the development of CUD. Cannabis/cannabinoids act primarily on the endocannabinoid system (ECS), which comprises two major receptor types, CB1 and CB2 receptors, their naturally occurring endogenous ligands, 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) and arachidonoylethanolamide (AEA), and the enzymes fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) and monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL).
CB1 and CB2 receptors belong to the superfamily of G-protein-coupled receptors and can indirectly modulate glutamate, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), opioid, serotonin, and dopamine signaling [24]. CB1 receptors are widely distributed throughout the brain, with a high density in regions involved in reward, mood, stress regulation, motor function, habit learning, and cognition [25,26]. Correspondingly, the ECS regulates a wide array of processes including motivation for natural rewards (e.g., food, sex, social behavior, etc.), memory, anxiety, pain, and stress response [27]. THC, a partial agonist at CB1 and CB2 receptors, exerts wide-ranging effects on these processes. Notably, the psychoactive and abuse-related effects of cannabis and THC are primarily mediated via CB1 receptors [28–30].
Repeated exposure to cannabis/THC significantly impacts the ECS. Based on positron emission tomography (PET) studies, individuals who regularly use cannabis have lower levels of FAAH, the AEA metabolizing enzyme [31] and unexpectedly also have lower levels of AEA in cerebrospinal fluid [32]. Circulating levels of 2AG appear to be inversely correlated with the amount of cannabis used [33]. PET studies investigating CB1 receptor availability in individuals who use cannabis daily have shown a down-regulation of CB1 receptors in both female [34] and male participants when compared to controls [35–37]. These receptor levels recover with continued abstinence.
Preclinical data are largely consistent with clinical data. Repeated THC administration to animals down regulates CB1 receptors [38,39], but is associated with higher levels of AEA in the limbic forebrain, and decreases in AEA and 2-AG levels in the striatum [40,41]. Circulating endocannabinoid concentrations are lower in animals administered THC [42], as in humans. Overall, there is still much to learn about the functional consequences of disrupting the ECS with regular cannabis use.
Preclinical Models of Cannabis Use
Laboratory animal models allow for the evaluation of drug effects under tightly controlled experimental conditions (e.g., drug history, parameters of drug and dose exposure, conditions of access, and environmental context) that are not possible in human volunteers. While preclinical studies cannot model all aspects of SUDs, there are well-established procedures for investigating drug abuse liability and behavioral processes associated with various substances of misuse [43]. Models include those in which drug is administered by the experimenter (i.e., non-contingent) and those in which drug consumption is controlled by the animal (i.e., contingent). For example, non-contingent drug exposure models include drug discrimination to assess interoceptive drug effects, place conditioning to assess the rewarding and aversive drug effects, and chronic drug exposure models to assess drug tolerance, physical dependence and the associated withdrawal syndrome when drug use is abruptly stopped. Contingent models include drug self-administration to assess drug taking and reinforcement, and related models of drug seeking and reinstatement that attempt to model aspects of relapse to drug taking (Figure 1).
A key consideration in cannabinoid research is the route of administration used in the model, as it significantly influences drug pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. In humans, inhalation of smoked or vaporized cannabis, the most common method of use, is characterized by fast absorption through the lungs resulting in almost immediate detectable drug levels in plasma [44,45], which peak after 5–10 minutes, and decrease to near nondetectable levels (<5 ng/ml) within 3 hours [44,46]. Recently, inhalation models in rodents have been developed using Volcano® type vaporizers, meter-dose inhalers and e-cigarette technology to more closely mimic human use [47–53]. In rats, vapor exposure to THC also results in peak plasma concentrations occurring rapidly following administration (e.g., ~10–15 minutes) in a concentration-dependent manner [48,54]. In contrast, oral administration of THC/cannabis results in slower and more variable absorption (e.g., peak ~2 hours post administration) compared to inhalation, due in part to first-pass metabolism in the liver. This results in markedly lower levels of THC in plasma, but high concentrations of the psychoactive metabolite 11-OH-THC compared to inhalation [55–57]. In rodents, peak behavioral effects and blood cannabinoid concentrations occur several hours (1.5–2) after administration, similar to humans [57–59]. Preclinical models often administer THC by intraperitoneal (IP) injection, as it is a technically simple route of administration and produces significant detectable plasma THC concentrations that are comparable to concentrations seen in humans (e.g., 40–200 ng/ml) [44]. Following an IP injection, THC levels in blood peak approximately 30–60 minutes post-dosing, with detectable levels in blood lasting for hours [60–62]. Notably, the peak plasma THC concentrations (Cmax) achieved via IP administration is comparable in magnitude to those observed with inhalation, both in rodent and human models, yet the duration of elevated plasma THC levels is typically longer. For example, a recent comparison of the pharmacokinetics between inhalation models and IP injection noted that, at doses that produced similar levels of THC in blood, IP administration resulted in dramatically higher levels of the active metabolite 11-OH-THC in the blood and brain [60]. IP administration could produce a much more robust and sustained activation of brain CB1 receptors, via THC and 11-OH-THC, that produce markedly different physiological, psychological, and behavioral effects compared to inhalation. Thus, the choice of administration route is particularly important for preclinical cannabinoid research and its translational relevance to human use.
Interoceptive/ “Subjective” effects: Drug discrimination
Drug discrimination, a behavioral pharmacology procedure used to assess the interoceptive effects of drugs, models subjective drug effects in humans, such as feel ‘good effects’ and ‘high’, which can provide insights into abuse-related effects of a drug. This has been recommended as a primary method for preclinical evaluation of cannabinoids for abuse liability by U.S. federal agencies [63]. Given the difficulty establishing reliable models of THC self-administration, drug discrimination studies provide an alternative method for assessing pharmacological actions of THC that model both the abuse liability and subjective effects of cannabinoids [64].
Positive reinforcing effects: Cannabinoid Self-administration
Drug self-administration is the ‘gold standard’ for demonstration of drug reinforcement and abuse liability. Drug reinforcement, as with any reinforcement, refers to the process by which drug presentation, contingent upon a behavioral response, increases the likelihood of that behavioral response [65]. Animals are trained to emit a behavior (e.g. nose-poke or lever press) that results in drug delivery. Reinforcement is demonstrated if the behavioral response associated with drug delivery is maintained and exceeds responding for the drug vehicle. The ability of a drug to serve as a reinforcer involves a dynamic behavioral process that is influenced by the state of the individual as well as the context in which a drug is available for consumption. Multiple variables can influence the rate and pattern of drug-maintained behavior including the speed of drug delivery, the onset and duration of drug effects (i.e., pharmacokinetics), and the schedule of reinforcement under which drug is available, including the duration of drug access and time between each drug delivery.
Historically, self-administration studies of THC and other cannabinoids in laboratory animals have used intravenous (IV) drug delivery, which allows for rapid drug onset. Initial studies looking to establish IV THC self-administration in laboratory animals primarily used simple fixed ratio schedules of reinforcement and short duration of daily drug access (e.g., 1-hr sessions) [66,67]. Early studies in rats had difficulty in demonstrating self-administration of IV THC using these standard procedures (doses ranging from 0.00625–0.05 mg/kg/infusion) [68–70]. Similarly, several early studies using rhesus monkeys found that responding for THC did not supersede vehicle [71,72] and were deemed “negative”. More recent studies of IV THC self-administration in rodents have also shown levels of drug intake that are not greater than vehicle or saline controls [73,74]. However, better lever discrimination was observed in THC-administering animals compared to vehicle-administering controls and classic biphasic dose response curves to THC are observed [75]. Animals self-administering THC achieve physiologically relevant doses of THC, show relevant behavioral effects of THC, and exhibit long term neurobiological changes, such as downregulation of CB1 receptors [74,75]. Interestingly, THC is self-administered intracranially into the cerebral ventricles [76], the ventral tegmental area, and the shell of the nucleus accumbens in rats [77].
Studies in squirrel monkeys have so far provided the strongest evidence of the reinforcing effects of IV THC using an animal model [67,78]. As detailed in a comprehensive review [66], these studies modified several key aspects of the procedure that likely contributed to its success over prior attempts. This included the use of very low unit THC doses (2–4 μg/kg/injection), use of a vehicle that enhanced THC solubility, rapid injection speed, exposure to a full range of THC doses, and frequent vehicle substitution early in training to increase sensitivity and discrimination of doses. The authors determined that these changes in procedural parameters were critical to establish THC self-injection. Moreover, reinforcement was more robust when using more complex schedules of reinforcement (e.g., fixed ratio (FR) 10, second order schedule) [67,78,79].
While THC self-administration has proven difficult to achieve, selective high affinity CB1 receptor agonists, which have greater efficacy than THC, are self-administered IV in a dose-dependent manner [80–83]. Self-administration is attenuated by pretreatment with CB1 receptor antagonists, confirming that the reinforcing effects are CB1 receptor-mediated [83,84]. These models of CB1 receptor agonist self-administration have been useful for screening potential medications for CUD and determining the neurobiological mechanisms of cannabinoid reinforcement [85]. However, THC has distinct properties from full CB1 receptor agonists. For example, rats will self-administer the CB1 agonist WIN 55,212–2 (0.01 mg/kg/infusion), but substitution with THC (0.003–0.1 mg/kg/infusion) did not maintain responding, demonstrating lower reinforcing efficacy of THC compared with WIN 55,212–2 [83]. Thus, models using THC rather than CB1 receptor agonists likely provide better translational validity when it comes to understanding the neurobiological mechanisms of cannabis reinforcement.
Over the last decade, efforts have been made to establish models that use vaporized cannabis or cannabinoid exposure, and more recently, THC self-administration [86–90]. The speed of vapor delivery of THC may facilitate reinforcement and the necessary contingent associations that develop with operant tasks, and bypasses the limitations of IV methods, such as catheterization, and cannabinoid solubility issues in vehicle solutions suitable for IV injection. Importantly, vapor ‘doses’ do not necessarily reflect the amount of drug received by the animal, as location, respiratory rate, and air flow can influence the pulmonary deposition and systemic bioavailability. To account for this, blood levels of THC and its metabolites are measured to verify exposure.
Recently, the first instance of cannabis vapor self-administration in male rats was demonstrated [86]. Under FR4 and progressive ratio (PR) schedules of reinforcement, greater responding for vapor deliveries was observed in rats self-administering a THC-rich cannabis vapor compared to rats responding for CBD-rich cannabis vapor or the vehicle vapor. Rats showed discrimination (>2:1 active vs. inactive nose-poke responding) for both THC- and CBD- rich cannabis extract vapor, but not for vehicle vapor. Rats administered a greater amount of vapor deliveries early in the session, consistent with the loading dose phenomenon seen in other drug self-administration models [87]. Motivation to obtain THC-rich cannabis extract vapor was higher than vehicle or CBD-rich cannabis extract vapor, as evidenced by higher breakpoints under the PR schedule. The reinforcing efficacy of THC-rich cannabis extract was CB1 receptor-mediated, as pretreatment with the CB1 receptor antagonist AM251 reduced responding. Further, response-contingent delivery of vaporized cannabis extracts produced behavioral and physiological changes that were consistent with passive vapor models; namely, reduced locomotor activity, increased daily food intake, and plasma THC and CBD levels that were consistent with amount of vapor deliveries obtained [86]. Recent studies from this group have replicated this initial finding that rats will voluntarily administer cannabis vapor, with delivery-dependent increases in drug plasma levels as well as behavioral and biological changes in cannabis vapor-administering groups [88,89], although THC and vehicle vapor maintained similar levels of responding. In these more recent studies, animals were maintained on an FR1 schedule versus an FR4 or PR as in the initial study where responding for THC vapor was higher than vehicle [86].
Recently, Cooper and colleagues [90] evaluated the reinforcing effects of aerosolized THC and other CB1 receptor agonists in rhesus macaques using a food-maintained responding procedure. Monkeys were trained to puff on a stem for aerosol drug or vehicle delivery, and puffing behavior was reinforced with candy under a PR schedule. In this study, full CB1 receptor agonists functioned as weak reinforcers, but inhaled aerosolized THC did not maintain responding above vehicle levels.
Overall, cannabinoid self-administration in animal models is less robust than for other addictive drugs. Instead of assuming a failure of translation, researchers should think critically about redefining “success” in these models and adapt existing models to account for the complex and unique pharmacology of cannabis and cannabinoids. Successful models should demonstrate sustained responding for drug and administration of biologically relevant doses. Given the long duration of action of many cannabinoids, future studies should optimize self-administration paradigms to reflect this—for example, by incorporating intermittent access, extended session durations, longer inter-infusion intervals, or more complex schedules (e.g., second-order schedules) that result in lower total drug intake. Further, researchers can continue to refine these models through genetic (selective breeding, modification) and environmental manipulations that could improve their ability to capture key features of problematic cannabis use and CUD. Future studies could also focus on optimizing reinforcement conditions, drug access schedules, and cue reactivity to enhance the translational value of these models for understanding vulnerability to CUD and evaluating potential treatments.
Rewarding effects: Conditioned place preference
Place conditioning is a commonly used Pavlovian conditioning procedure to assess the positive (rewarding) or negative (aversive) motivational effects of addictive drugs in rodents, non-human primates, and humans [91–96]. The place conditioning apparatus used for rodents is typically a 2-sided or 3-sided chambered compartment with dividers between sides; each side of the box has distinct environmental cues (e.g., floor texture, color). Animals are treated with a drug/dose and placed in one side of the compartment (CS+); On alternate trials, drug vehicle administrations are paired with the other side of the compartment (CS−). After repeated drug-CS+ or vehicle-CS− pairings, the divider is removed, and drug-free animals are allowed to move freely between compartments. Conditioned place preference (CPP) is established if animals spend more time in the drug-paired chamber on the drug-free test. Conditioned place aversion (CPA) is established if the animal avoids the drug-paired compartment during the drug-free test. Using place conditioning procedures, most addictive drugs, depending on the dose, support significant CPP or CPA.
In tests of the conditioned effects of systemically injected THC in rodents, low doses (0.075–0.75 mg/kg, IP) produce preference, while higher doses (5–6 mg/kg, IP) produce aversion [76]. The aversion seen at higher doses reflects a dysphoric effect of THC and CB1 receptor agonists, which may be overcoming any rewarding effects of the drug [97,98]. If a primer dose of THC is given prior to CPP conditioning (i.e., pre-exposure), it can shift preference for THC-paired compartments [99], supporting a theory of an initial dysphoric effect of THC upon first administration, particularly with injection routes of administration. Pretreatment with CBD prior to THC conditioning (1:1, 10 mg/kg) also can reverse the CPA seen with THC-alone [100]. Administration of CB1 receptor antagonists block CPP and CPA produced by THC and other cannabinoid agonists [101,102].
Several studies have demonstrated CPP to vaporized THC in rats. In one study, rats exposed to THC vapor (30 minutes exposure, 200 mg/ml) displayed CPP, with female rats requiring more THC vapor exposure to produce CPP compared with males [103]. Vapor concentrations that produced CPP also resulted in significant levels of THC in blood (~25–50 ng/ml) [103], concentrations that are comparable to those detected in humans reporting positive subjective drug effects after vaporizing cannabis [104]. Similarly, a separate study also observed CPP in male rats exposed to 10 mg of vaporized THC across 10 minutes [50]. To date, no studies using vaporized THC exposure have produced CPA, which may reflect a route of administration difference compared with IP administration. However, additional studies using vaporized THC would be needed to determine whether CPA is observed at higher doses.
Extinction and reinstatement (relapse) models
Extinction and reinstatement are key processes used to study the persistence of drug-seeking behavior and to model features of drug relapse [105]. In extinction, a learned behavior (e.g., responding on the drug-associated lever) decreases or is eliminated when the reinforcing stimulus (e.g., the drug or associated cues) is no longer available. In the context of operant self-administration, drug is not delivered following an operant response, and in the context of CPP, exposure to the previously-drug paired environment is not preceded by drug exposure. Reinstatement refers to the return of previously extinguished behavior (i.e., active responses or time spent in drug-paired chamber), which can be triggered by exposure to specific cues, stress, or the drug itself.
In squirrel monkeys that self-administer THC, classic reinstatement occurs with the presentation of a small, non-contingent dose of THC [106]. Yet in rodents, as validation of self-administration models of THC and cannabis are considerably behind when compared to other additive drugs, so are models of reinstatement. There is some evidence that stimuli paired with THC serve as conditioned reinforcers and may maintain seeking behavior. As described above, rats showed CPP to vaporized THC. When tested under extinction conditions, this preference was more persistent in females compared with males [103]. Rats showed increases in lever responding during an extinction test after a 7-day forced abstinence period from daily IV self-administration of THC+CBD [75]. Further, rats showed reinstatement following reintroduction of drug-paired cues contingent on lever pressing [75]. Likewise, in a study by Freels and colleagues [86], rats showed classic increases in responding during extinction tests.
Cannabinoid withdrawal
The assessment of physical dependence in laboratory animals typically involves chronic drug administration and assessment of withdrawal symptoms when drug administration is abruptly discontinued (i.e., abstinence withdrawal) or after acute administration of a receptor specific antagonist which displaces the agonist from the receptor, immediately resulting in withdrawal (precipitated withdrawal). For abstinence withdrawal, significant effects on behavior should differ from both the effects of the drug and no drug controls and be time limited (e.g., return to baseline). For precipitated withdrawal, significant effects on behavior must also differ from effects of the antagonist and its vehicle (control).
The evaluation of THC/cannabis physical dependence and abstinence withdrawal in laboratory animals has several challenges. First, many symptoms of cannabis withdrawal in humans are subjective, and mood related. Second, THC is highly lipophilic, stored in fat, and then slowly released. The redistribution and slow release of THC from tissues results in a slower onset and time course of withdrawal symptoms to subside when chronic THC/cannabis use is abruptly discontinued. Therefore, demonstration of a THC abstinence withdrawal syndrome in laboratory animals has been variable, and when found, the magnitude of withdrawal effects appears relatively minor [107,108]. In contrast, antagonist-precipitated withdrawal in rats and nonhuman primates treated with THC is more robust and reliable and is the predominantly used model [109–113].
In rats, precipitated and spontaneous withdrawal symptoms include wet-dog shakes, facial rubs, horizontal and vertical activity, forepaw fluttering, chewing, tongue rolling, paw shakes, head shakes, retropulsion, myoclonic spasms, front paw treading, and ptosis [109]. In addition to somatic symptoms, deficits in early-stage cognition including disrupted prepulse inhibition, and affective responses (increased startle reactivity) are observed immediately after administration of the antagonist [113]. Mice exposed repeatedly to cannabis smoke exhibit similar precipitated withdrawal effects as THC-injected mice [111]. Recent studies have examined more complex behaviors and neurobiological markers during spontaneous withdrawal and have observed that mice show sleep disturbances and increased irritability, as well as altered striatal dopamine release during abstinence [112].
Another strategy to model the subjective aspects of withdrawal is to examine changes in ongoing behavior suppressed by withdrawal (e.g., operant responding) [114]. This strategy can be particularly useful for medications development to examine whether novel compounds can restore behavior suppressed after abrupt abstinence or as precipitated with an antagonist. For example, under a PR schedule of operant reinforcement for sucrose, precipitated withdrawal from THC reduces the motivation for sucrose (breakpoint) in mice [115].
The interoceptive (subjective) effects of a dysphoric withdrawal state can also be assessed in animals using drug discrimination procedures, as described above. Rhesus monkeys that were maintained on the long-acting CB1 receptor agonist AM2389 were trained to discriminate rimonabant from saline [116]. When AM2389 was discontinued, subjects exhibited the discriminative stimulus effects of rimonabant, demonstrating that spontaneous withdrawal substituted for this rimonabant-precipitated withdrawal [116]. This procedure allows for testing medications that can alter the subjective experience associated with cannabis withdrawal.
Notably, there is growing evidence that females may be more vulnerable than males to developing dependence after chronic cannabinoid exposure [117], and this is also observed in preclinical models. Females are more sensitive to the antinociceptive, hypothermic and locomotor effects of acute IP injections of THC and synthetic cannabinoids [117–119]. Female rats develop tolerance faster and at lower cannabinoid doses than males [119,120] and discontinuation of chronic THC administration produces more anxiety-related behaviors in female rats compared with males [121].
Intracranial self-stimulation models: Reward function
Intracranial self-stimulation (ICSS) is an operant conditioning technique where animals can self-administer direct electrical stimulation to brain regions that underlie reward, such as the medial forebrain bundle of the mesolimbic dopamine system. ICSS can be leveraged to assess how these drugs modify the threshold intensity and frequency required for this electrical stimulation to maintain its reinforcing properties [122]. Drugs with rewarding properties generally facilitate ICSS, meaning they enhance dopamine system activity and lower the stimulation threshold required for reinforcement. Consistent with this, CB1 receptor agonists have been shown to increase sensitivity to electrical brain stimulation (enhanced ICSS), while the CB1 receptor antagonist/inverse agonist rimonabant produces the opposite effect [123–125]. Interestingly, higher doses of THC have also been shown to increase brain stimulation thresholds, indicative of a biphasic effect [126,127]. Additionally, ICSS can be used to study withdrawal-related deficits in reward system activity, characterized by increased stimulation thresholds following cessation of chronic cannabinoid exposure [128]. Therefore, ICSS can be a valuable tool for evaluating potential pharmacotherapies, including assessing how candidate treatments modulate cannabinoid-induced or cannabinoid withdrawal-induced alterations in ICSS thresholds.
Medication Effects: Preclinical Models
A goal of developing animal models of cannabis or THC administration is to establish a medications development pipeline for treatment of CUD in humans. Due in part to the difficulty in establishing parameters that result in self-administration of cannabinoids in animals, there has been limited preclinical research in developing new medications to reduce cannabis intake. However, each of the models described above can be useful in testing potential CUD medications and/or uncovering therapeutic targets through understanding the neurobiology of cannabinoid subjective/interoceptive effects, reward, reinforcement, and withdrawal. Table 1 summarizes findings from preclinical experiments, human laboratory studies, and/or clinical trials for medications that have been evaluated as potential pharmacotherapies for CUD. For brevity, only compounds with supporting preclinical data and evidence of testing in humans are included. Several additional therapeutic strategies (e.g., neutral CB1 receptor antagonists, adenosine A2A receptor antagonists, and alpha-7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor antagonists) have shown promise in preclinical models [129–131]; however, these studies are not included in the Table or discussed in detail in this chapter, as they have not yet progressed to human testing.
Cannabidiol
The effects of CBD on THC/cannabis reward, reinforcement, and withdrawal have been tested across a range of species. CBD engages with a diverse set of molecular targets, including G-protein coupled receptors, such as serotonin-1A (5-HT1A) and opioid receptors [132], and ion channels, such as transient receptor potential V1 (TRPV1) [133,134]. More recent evidence also indicates that CBD acts as a negative allosteric modulator at the CB1 receptors [135,136]. CBD’s effects in combination with THC or cannabis, however, have been variable, depending on the dose, dosing regimen, and outcome of interest. For example, when THC and CBD are co-administered orally, ‘drug-drug’ pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic interactions have been observed, such that high dose CBD increases THC’s subjective drug effects [137]; these effects were associated with inhibition of THC clearance via cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes [138].
In a drug discrimination study using rats, CBD (0.3–30 mg/kg, IP) did not alter the discriminative stimulus effects of THC [139]. In contrast, CBD (17.8 mg/kg IV) increased the potency of THC (0.1 mg/kg, IV) in a drug-discrimination study using rhesus monkeys [140]. CBD (30 mg/kg, IP) lengthened the time course of the discriminative stimulus effects of low doses of THC (0.3 and 1.0 mg/kg, IP) in rats [141]. The one study, to our knowledge, that has examined the effect of CBD on THC self-administration found that CBD pretreatment did not impact THC IV self-administration across a range of CBD:THC dose ratios [73]. In a mouse model of cannabinoid (CP,55,940) withdrawal, CBD blocked some somatic symptoms associated with withdrawal and normalized the cannabinoid withdrawal-induced increase in anxiety-like behavior [142].
Together, these preclinical findings suggest that while CBD’s effects on THC reward and reinforcement are mixed, they generally point toward an enhancement; however, CBD may attenuate withdrawal- and anxiety-related behaviors. Further research is needed to clarify CBD’s potential utility for treating CUD.
Cannabinoid receptor competitive antagonists and biased antagonists
CB1 receptor antagonists and inverse agonists (e.g., rimonabant) attenuate a range of cannabinoid effects and provided early evidence that repeated THC administration produced dependence [143]. Specifically, rimonabant decreases self-administration of IV THC [84,144], reduces motivation for cannabis vapor puffs [86], blocks THC’s discriminative stimulus effects [145], and reduces the conditioned rewarding effects of THC [101,102]. However, with repeated THC administration, CB1 receptor antagonists/inverse agonists also precipitate cannabinoid withdrawal symptoms, including physical symptoms (i.e., wet dog shakes) and anxiety-like behavior [30,109,110,146] suggesting these compounds would have limited utility for patients with CUD. In addition, rimonabant produced serious adverse effects in a clinical trial (described below).
An alternative approach is to alter, rather than block, the effects of cannabis at the CB1 receptor. The steroid hormone pregnenolone alters the effect of CB1 receptor agonists in a signaling-specific manner by binding to a specific intracellular site on the CB1 receptor, distinct from the binding site of THC and other CB1 receptor agonists [147]. As pregnenolone is rapidly metabolized, Aelis Pharma developed a new pharmacological agent, AEF0117, which is a non-metabolizable pregnenolone derivative. AEF0117 was shown to antagonize a range of THC-related behaviors in animals, including hypolocomotion and hyperphagia (i.e., increased appetite), as well as to reduce THC-induced dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens. Further, pretreatment with AEF0117 reduced self-administration of the CB1 receptor agonist WIN55,212–2 in mice and reduced self-administration of THC in squirrel monkeys [106]. AEF0117 also reduced reinstatement of THC seeking in monkeys after THC-reinforced responding was extinguished [106]. Unlike rimonabant, AEF0117 alone produced none of the behavioral effects associated with CB1 antagonists that likely contribute to their poor tolerability, such as reduced food intake and increased anxiety-like behavior.
Other candidate medication agents
A potential therapeutic strategy to reduce symptoms of cannabis withdrawal is to increase endocannabinoid levels by targeting FAAH or MAGL, the enzymes responsible for the degradation of the endogenous cannabinoid ligands AEA and 2-AG, respectively. In animals, acute administration of either a FAAH inhibitor (URB597) or MAGL inhibitor (JZL184) significantly attenuated rimonabant-precipitated withdrawal signs [148]. In contrast to its promising effects on withdrawal, URB597 did not significantly modify the discriminative stimulus effects of THC [149], nor did it alter the reinforcing effects of THC in nonhuman primates [144].
Preclinical studies have shown that the mixed opioid antagonist naltrexone can reduce the discriminative stimulus effects of THC. Neither nor-binaltorphimine (a selective kappa-opioid receptor antagonist) nor naltrindole (a selective delta-opioid antagonist) had any effect, suggesting that THC’s interoceptive effects are specifically mediated by mu-opioid receptor activity [150]. However, other preclinical studies using drug discrimination have not shown an effect of naltrexone [151], indicating opioid-receptor antagonist modulation of the discriminative-stimulus effects of cannabinoids may be complex and depend on multiple factors (e.g., antagonist dose, cannabinoid history).
Opioid antagonists have also shown promise in reducing the reinforcing effects of cannabinoids. Naloxone reduced self-administration of CB1 receptor agonists in mice [152] and naltrexone reduced IV THC self-administration in squirrel monkeys [153]. Naloxone also reduced CPP for a CB1 receptor agonist [101]. The mechanism of opioid-receptor antagonist effects on reducing cannabinoid reward and reinforcement appears to occur via blocking CB1 receptor activation-induced dopamine release in mesolimbic areas, as shown by in vivo microdialysis studies [154]. However, naloxone was also able to precipitate withdrawal symptoms in rats chronically exposed to cannabinoids [152], although this was not replicated in human studies (see below).
Human Laboratory Models of Cannabis Use Disorder
Like preclinical studies, key features of CUD can be modeled in placebo-controlled human laboratory studies enrolling nontreatment-seeking volunteers: cannabis’s abuse-related subjective effects, cannabis self-administration, and cannabis withdrawal. These models allow for researchers to control cannabis administration (e.g., varying doses, blinding procedures, cued or ad-libitum smoking protocols), assess discrete behavioral aspects of cannabis use (e.g., self-administration, withdrawal symptoms, positive subjective effects), and test novel pharmacotherapies for CUD while controlling for naturalistic cannabis and other drug use. The following section briefly reviews human laboratory models that examine discrete behaviors relevant to CUD.
Positive subjective effects
Abuse liability is defined as the potential of a drug, in this case cannabis, to elicit positive subjective effects that may reinforce use [63]. Early research showed that among a sample of individuals who regularly use cannabis, administration of smoked cannabis (1.8–3.6% THC) or oral THC (2.5–30 mg) increased ratings such as ‘good drug effect’, ‘high’ ‘liking’, and ‘willingness to take cannabis again’, compared to placebo [155–157]. Repeated daily exposure to active cannabis or THC administration resulted in diminished subjective effects, suggesting the development of tolerance to the abuse-related effects of both smoked cannabis and oral THC [156–158]. Tolerance to the effects of cannabis may lead to increased consumption as individuals seek to achieve the desired effects that were previously experienced with lower levels of use. Given that positive subjective responses have been shown to correspond with the development of CUD [159,160], one approach to developing a pharmacotherapy for CUD is to reduce cannabis’s positive effects.
Positive reinforcing effects: Cannabinoid self-administration
The choice to self-administer drugs is influenced by both the nature of available alternative reinforcers, such as social interaction, food, or monetary rewards, and the relative cost of those reinforcers. In order to assess the contribution of these factors on cannabis self-administration, researchers have manipulated the THC concentration and ‘cost’ of an alternative reinforcer. For example, in a 16-day residential study among individuals who use cannabis, Haney and colleagues [161] showed that THC (0.0, 2.2, or 3.9% w/w) was the essential reinforcing component of cannabis self-administration. Moreover, findings from this study showed that cannabis self-administration can be influenced by monetary contingencies, with participants opting not to smoke cannabis when an opportunity to earn additional money was presented [161]. Further research from this laboratory supports these findings, demonstrating that, in a separate sample, the opportunity to earn money served as an effective alternative to cannabis self-administration [162]. Recent work examining the effects of oral THC maintenance on cannabis self-administration showed that under forced-choice (drug vs. money) conditions, active oral THC significantly reduced self-administration (5.7% THC) [163]. Findings from these studies demonstrates that the positive-reinforcing effects of cannabis are malleable and sensitive to changes in THC concentrations and contingencies to earn money.
Cannabis withdrawal
There are also negative reinforcing effects of cannabis that may maintain cannabis use, particularly among those who use daily [28]. When cannabis use is abruptly reduced or ceased, withdrawal symptoms may begin within 24 hours, typically peak between 2 to 6 days and last up to 1 to 2 weeks. Cannabis withdrawal comprises negative mood (e.g., irritability, anger, aggression, anxiety), sleep difficulty, physical symptoms (e.g., sweating, fever, chills, headache, shakiness/tremors, abdominal pain) and decreased food intake [156,164–168]. Administering smoked cannabis or subthreshold doses of oral THC during abstinence alleviates withdrawal symptoms [156,157,165]. These findings highlight the clinical significance of cannabis withdrawal symptoms in the development of potential pharmacotherapies, as they often serve as a precursor to cannabis relapse and drive persistent patterns of use.
Medication Effects: Human Laboratory Models and Clinical Trials
Although there are no FDA-approved medications to treat CUD, several medication approaches have shown some promise in human laboratory studies. In the following sections, we briefly review the effects of medications on factors likely to contribute to the maintenance of daily cannabis use, organized by outcome and pharmacological targets (Table 1). For a more detailed review of pharmacotherapy candidates for CUD, see Alayoubi et al., 2024 [169]; Brezing and Levin, 2016 [170].
Abstinence initiation: Reducing the positive subjective and reinforcing effects of cannabis
Cannabidiol
One approach to facilitating drug treatment is by reducing the positive reinforcing effects of the substance. CBD, a non-intoxicating constituent of the cannabis plant, has been tested using this approach. Although early studies showed that oral CBD reduced oral THC’s subjective effects [171,172], subsequent studies have reported no such effect [173–176]. Haney and colleagues [177] conducted a study to determine whether oral CBD pretreatment reduced the positive subjective and reinforcing effects of smoked cannabis. Yet, among non-treatment seeking individuals who frequently used cannabis (>4 times per week), cannabis’s positive subjective and reinforcing effects did not vary as a function of CBD pretreatment (200 mg, 400 mg, 800 mg) relative to placebo [177]. These data are consistent with the negative findings in preclinical studies (Table 1) and suggest that acute, oral CBD administration may have limited therapeutic utility as a pharmacotherapy for CUD.
By contrast, a phase 2a, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized, adaptive Bayesian trial showed that maintenance on CBD (800 mg), rather than pretreatment, significantly reduced cannabis use across a 4-week period compared to placebo [178]. Notably, the treatment effects observed in this study were small: participants used 0.27–0.48 fewer days/week in the CBD condition relative to placebo, so the clinical relevance of this finding is unclear; the authors note the study was not designed to estimate efficacy. Further studies are needed.
Cannabinoid receptor competitive antagonists and biased antagonists
Reducing cannabis use by directly blocking or altering its rewarding effects at the cannabinoid receptor is another treatment option for CUD. Rimonabant, a selective orthosteric CB1 receptor antagonist [179,180], had shown promising clinical results for weight loss and metabolic disorders [181] and tobacco smoking cessation [182]. Human laboratory studies showed that rimonabant, when administered in a single high dose or repeated low doses, attenuated the subjective effects of smoked cannabis [29,183]. However, rimonabant has been associated with serious adverse psychiatric effects (e.g., anxiety, depression, suicidality) and was removed from the market, precluding further investigation of its use as a treatment for CUD.
As described above, AEF0117, is a pregnenolone derivative that alters the effects of CB1 receptor agonists by binding to an intracellular site on the CB1 receptor (distinct from THC’s binding site) that does not produce the myriad adverse effects of competitive antagonists like rimonabant. In a phase 2a trial among nontreatment-seeking volunteers with CUD, AEF0117 significantly reduced cannabis’s positive subjective effects by 19% (0.6 mg) and 38% (1 mg) and reduced cannabis self-administration (1 mg) compared to placebo [106]. These findings, suggesting that AEF0117 may be a tolerable and an efficacious treatment option for CUD, led to a large multisite phase 2b clinical trial for the treatment of CUD (results not yet published).
Other candidate medication agents
Naltrexone is an opioid receptor antagonist that is FDA-approved for the treatment of opioid use disorder and alcohol use disorder. As discussed above, opioid antagonists reduce the reinforcing effects of CB1 receptor agonists in preclinical studies [101,153], suggesting that naltrexone may hold some promise as an effective pharmacotherapy for CUD. Although acute naltrexone pretreatment has been shown to increase the positive subjective effects of cannabis in individuals who use cannabis [184,185], naltrexone maintenance (50 mg) over 4 to 6 weeks significantly reduced active cannabis self-administration and its positive subjective cannabis effects (Haney, 2015). An open-label clinical trial testing injectable naltrexone (380 mg IM) demonstrated the safety and feasibility of this approach in CUD patients [186]. Future placebo-controlled randomized clinical trials are needed to determine the efficacy of naltrexone as a treatment for CUD.
Tiagabine, a GABA reuptake inhibitor, has also been examined for treating CUD. Wesley and colleagues [187] showed that tiagabine (12 mg) did not significantly affect most of cannabis’s subjective effects or cannabis self-administration, and in some cases worsened measures of sleep and cannabis craving. The authors concluded these findings do not support the continued evaluation of tiagabine as a pharmacotherapy for CUD. Similarly, pregabalin, another anticonvulsant medication, did not reduce cannabis self-administration relative to placebo in the human laboratory [188].
Cannabinoid receptor agonists
Dronabinol (oral THC), a cannabinoid receptor agonist, has been examined as a pharmacotherapy for CUD in the context of ongoing cannabis use. Schlienz and colleagues [163] tested whether high doses of dronabinol (120–240 mg) impacted subjective cannabis effects and rates of smoked cannabis self-administration under progressive ratio conditions. They showed that maintenance on dronabinol significantly increased self-reported ratings of ‘feel a good drug effect’ compared to placebo. Moreover, both doses of dronabinol reduced cannabis withdrawal, craving, and self-administration, compared to placebo [163]. To note, the dronabinol doses used within this study were substantially higher than those tested in other studies that failed to shift cannabis use with dronabinol under abstinent conditions (see below).
Relapse prevention: Reducing the negative reinforcing effects of cannabis
Cannabinoid receptor agonists
Both inpatient and outpatient studies among non-treatment seeking samples have shown that dronabinol administered during cannabis abstinence dose-dependently decreased withdrawal symptoms, relative to placebo [163,164,168,189]. Yet, in a laboratory model of ‘relapse’ (operationally defined as a return to cannabis self-administration at financial cost after a period of abstinence), dronabinol (60 mg) reduced symptoms of cannabis withdrawal without altering cannabis relapse [190]. Similarly, dronabinol (40 mg) also reduced cannabis withdrawal symptoms and improved retention in patients seeking treatment for their cannabis use, yet did not significantly alter rates of continuous (2 weeks) abstinence relative to placebo (dronabinol: 17.7%; placebo: 15.6%; [191]).
Dronabinol has also been tested in combination with lofexidine, an α2-adrenergic receptor agonist, based on preclinical data showing that α2-adrenergic receptor agonists decrease symptoms of precipitated cannabis withdrawal [107]. In the human laboratory, dronabinol (60 mg) combined with lofexidine (2.4 mg) decreased both symptoms of withdrawal and cannabis ‘relapse’ [190]. However, in the clinic, dronabinol (60 mg) combined with lofexidine (1.8 mg) failed to increase rates of continuous (3 weeks) abstinence relative to placebo [192]. To note, unlike the laboratory study, many patients in the clinical study were unable to tolerate the target medication doses, which may have contributed to the discordant findings.
Other cannabinoid receptor agonists such as nabilone and nabiximols have been investigated as treatments for CUD. Nabilone, a synthetic cannabinoid analogue of THC with greater bioavailability, a longer duration of action, and clearer dose-linearity than dronabinol, may be a superior medication [193,194]. Nabilone, alone and in combination with zolpidem (a GABAergic receptor agonist used to treat insomnia), has been shown to reverse characteristic symptoms of cannabis withdrawal, including worsened mood, disrupted sleep, and decreased food intake, and to decrease cannabis ‘relapse’ [195,196]. Nabilone has not yet been tested in a clinical population.
Nabiximols, an oromucosal spray composed of a 1:1 ratio of THC (2.7mg/actuation) and CBD (2.5mg/actuation) reduces cannabis withdrawal symptoms in both treatment seeking [197] and non-treatment seeking samples [198]. However, there have been inconsistent findings regarding the effectiveness of nabiximols to reduce cannabis use. Initial work by Allsop and colleagues [197] found that nabiximols (86.4 mg THC: 80 mg CBD per day) did not promote long-term reductions in weekly cannabis use following medication cessation. More recent work has shown that nabiximols in combination with a psychosocial intervention significantly reduced the number of days cannabis was used over a 12-week period (days of cannabis use: 53 days with placebo vs 35 days with nabiximols; [199]). Overall, these studies suggest that CB1 receptor agonist medications show promise as potential treatments for CUD by consistently reducing symptoms of cannabis withdrawal and reducing measures of cannabis use in the laboratory and in the clinic under certain conditions.
Serotonergic agents
Buspirone is a 5HT1A partial agonist that is commonly used to treat anxiety. A clinical study evaluating the efficacy of buspirone (60 mg) as a treatment for CUD has shown that this medication was not more efficacious than placebo in reducing cannabis use [200]. More recently, a human laboratory study testing lorcaserin (10 mg), a serotonin-2c (5HT2c) agonist, in a non-treatment seeking sample, showed that it significantly reduced cannabis craving during abstinence and reduced a laboratory measure of cannabis relapse compared to placebo [201]. In a 10-week, outpatient, open-label clinical trial in treatment-seekers, lorcaserin (target dose of 20 mg extended-release daily) reduced the average frequency of cannabis-use days per week by 1.74 days relative to baseline, suggesting the medication warrants further controlled study [202]. Notably, in 2020, the FDA issued a Drug Safety Communication that requested lorcaserin be withdrawn due to its potential to increase cancer risk [203], leaving the future unclear for 5HT2c-receptor agonists for the treatment of CUD.
GABAertic agents
Zolpidem (12.5 mg; extended-release), a non-benzodiazepine GABAA receptor agonist, reduced cannabis withdrawal-related disruptions in sleep [196,204]. Zolpidem alone did not decrease cannabis relapse in the laboratory setting, although zolpidem combined with nabilone (6 mg/day) did decrease cannabis relapse [196]. Similarly, a 12-week clinical trial in treatment seekers showed that zolpidem-extended release (12.5 mg) attenuated abstinence-induced sleep disturbance early in treatment but did not affect cannabis abstinence rates compared to placebo [205]. These findings suggest zolpidem alone may not be an effective pharmacotherapy for treating CUD.
Baclofen, a GABA-B receptor agonist used to treat spasticity and muscle pain, and divalproex, an anticonvulsant commonly used to prevent and control seizures associated with epilepsy, have both been examined as potential treatments for CUD. Neither baclofen (60 mg, 90 mg/day) nor divalproex (1500 mg/day) reduced symptoms of cannabis withdrawal in the human laboratory [164,206]; divalproex also did not alter cannabis ‘relapse’ [164]. Moreover, divalproex (1500 mg/day) did not improve rates of abstinence in a randomized clinical trial (RCT) [207].
Other candidate medication agents
Other candidate medications agents with varied mechanisms of action have been examined as potential pharmacotherapy for CUD, including a FAAH inhibitor (PF-04457845), celecoxib, guanfacine, bupropion, mirtazapine, nefazodone, quetiapine, and varenicline.
The rationale for testing a FAAH-inhibitor and the COX-2 inhibitor, celecoxib, was to see if potentiating endocannabinoid levels through inhibition of their enzymatic metabolism would reduce cannabis withdrawal and use. D’Souza and colleagues [208] showed that the long-acting, time-dependent and selective FAAH inhibitor, PF-04457845 (4 mg), reduced cannabis withdrawal symptoms and lowered self-reported cannabis use at 4 weeks in men. These data supported a recent multi-site randomized clinical trial for CUD; results have not yet been published. Celecoxib, used for osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis, was also hypothesized to increase endocannabinoid levels and thereby reduce cannabis withdrawal and ‘relapse’ in the human laboratory. However, celecoxib (200 mg BID) did not show significant effects on cannabis withdrawal or ‘relapse’, and in fact, increased cannabis craving compared to placebo, suggesting it does not hold promise for the treatment of CUD [209].
Antidepressants have also been explored as potential treatments for CUD. These include bupropion, an atypical antidepressant that inhibits norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake and is FDA-approved for tobacco smoking cessation; mirtazapine, a tetracyclic antidepressant which antagonizes the adrenergic α2-autoreceptors and -heteroreceptors and blocks serotonin 5-HT2 and 5-HT3 receptors, nefazodone, which antagonizes 5-HT2 receptors and inhibits 5-HT uptake, serotonin; and atomoxetine, a selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor commonly prescribed for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Human laboratory studies have found mixed results regarding the effects of these antidepressant medications on cannabis withdrawal symptoms and self-administration. Among non-treatment seeking samples, bupropion-sustained release (SR) (300 mg) worsened withdrawal symptoms [210], while nefazodone (450 mg) decreased ratings of some cannabis withdrawal symptoms (e.g., ‘anxious’ and ‘muscle pain’) [211], and mirtazapine (30 mg) improved sleep and food intake during cannabis abstinence but otherwise did not reduce other symptoms of withdrawal, or reduce ‘relapse’ [206]. Similarly, neither bupropion-SR (150 mg BID) nor nefazodone (300 mg BID) improved symptoms of cannabis withdrawal or reduced cannabis use in a clinical trial [212]. Moreover, studies have shown that atomoxetine results in clinically significant gastrointestinal side effects and does not have a promising role in the treatment of CUD [213,214].
More recently, studies have examined guanfacine, an α2A-adrenergic receptor agonist, that is FDA-approved for the treatment of ADHD and hypertension [215] In non-treatment seeking cannabis smokers, Haney and colleagues [216] found that immediate-release guanfacine (2 mg) at bedtime significantly reduced ratings of irritability and improved objective sleep measures during cannabis abstinence relative to placebo, but did not affect cannabis ‘relapse’. However, in a separate sample of non-treatment seeking cannabis smokers, immediate-release guanfacine (3 mg) did not show significant effects on withdrawal, craving, or sleep (Holst et al., 2019). An outpatient open-label pilot trial showed that extended-release guanfacine, gradually titrated to a dose of 4 mg (or highest dose tolerated), significantly reduced average daily amount of cannabis use and cannabis use days over the course of 8 weeks [217]. Taken together, there are signals that guanfacine, particularly the extended-release formulation, may have promise for CUD but further study is needed.
Quetiapine is an atypical antipsychotic that is commonly used to treat schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and as an adjunct treatment for major depressive disorder [218,219]. Quetiapine is an antagonist at serotonin type 2A, dopamine type 2, histamine type 1, and adrenergic receptors. A human laboratory study showed that quetiapine (200 mg) improved sleep quality, increased caloric intake, and decreased weight loss during cannabis abstinence. Quetiapine also increased cannabis craving and self-administration, suggesting it does not show promise as a pharmacotherapy for CUD [220]. However, there are intriguing clinical findings at a higher dose that suggest quetiapine may warrant further study. A 12-week randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial showed that quetiapine (300 mg nightly) increased the likelihood of a transition from heavy cannabis use (5 to 7 days per week) to moderate use (2 to 4 days per week) [221]. The authors note that the clinical significance of these results was likely to be modest, and future trials should consider examining the combined effects of quetiapine and behavioral interventions (e.g., contingency management).
Researchers have also examined varenicline, a nAChR partial agonist of the α4β2 subtype and a full agonist of the α7 subtype, which is an FDA-approved medication for tobacco smoking cessation[222,223], as an approach to treat CUD. In a non-treatment seeking sample of individuals who co-used tobacco and cannabis, varenicline (1 mg BID) alone facilitated tobacco cessation and lessened negative mood but only reduced symptoms of cannabis withdrawal when combined with nabilone (4 mg BID) [224]. In a placebo-controlled 6-week pilot trial, varenicline (1 mg BID), added to a brief MET intervention, significantly decreased self-reported cannabis withdrawal, percentage of days used, and use sessions per day during treatment compared to baseline [225]. This preliminary data provide support for further investigation of varenicline in larger clinical trials.
Summary
Research on the development of pharmacotherapies for CUD has lagged relative to that of most other SUDs. One challenge in this field has been establishing robust preclinical models of cannabinoid self-administration, which impacts the translational pipeline for novel targets. Existing preclinical models with cannabis or cannabinoids, adapted from those used for drugs such as cocaine or opioids, do not recapitulate key behavioral characteristics of a model of addictive behavior (e.g., escalation, high levels of intake). This is an evolving field, however, with continuing advances in preclinical models of vaporized cannabis administration showing promise relative to IV self-administration models better suited to fast-acting, non-lipophilic drugs.
Human laboratory models, using smoked or vaporized cannabis, can capture key features of CUD including cannabis’s abuse-related subjective effects, cannabis withdrawal, and cannabis self-administration under conditions of abstinence (a model of ‘relapse’), and under non-abstinent conditions (a model of abstinence initiation). A wide range of medications have been tested using these models, with a wide range of outcomes, i.e., increased and decreased cannabis withdrawal and cannabis self-administration.
The most essential value of preclinical and human laboratory models focusing on developing pharmacotherapies for CUD is their predictive validity [226]. Although defining predictive validity is difficult in lieu of a medication with demonstrated efficacy, there is evidence of consistent effects from preclinical through human laboratory to clinic. One such example is AEF0117, which reduced cannabis self-administration in non-human primates and non-treatment seeking cannabis smokers [106] and reduced cannabis use (without promoting abstinence) in patients with moderate CUD seeking treatment (in preparation).
Discrepancies between preclinical and human laboratory models and RCTs also provide valuable opportunities for both backward and forward translation to improve the predictive validity of these models. For example, in the human laboratory, the combination of dronabinol and lofexidine significantly reduced cannabis withdrawal and ‘relapse’ [190], but failed to produce sustained cannabis abstinence in an RCT, the primary endpoint [191]. As noted, patients in the RCT could not tolerate the doses deemed efficacious in the inpatient human laboratory, indicating that human laboratory models need to prioritize testing medication conditions (e.g., dose, frequency of dose administration) that are feasible and well-tolerated in an outpatient setting. Interestingly, a secondary analysis of the RCT showed that dronabinol and lofexidine did not promote abstinence but did significantly shift CUD patients in the clinic from heavy to moderate cannabis smokers, demonstrating some consistency with the human laboratory findings when similar endpoints are evaluated [192].
This finding highlights the important possibility that some positive human laboratory findings do not parallel RCTs because the latter’s definition of sustained abstinence from cannabis may be a problematic definition of medication efficacy. A significant proportion of those seeking treatment for their cannabis use are not seeking abstinence, so it is no surprise that every well-powered RCT requiring sustained abstinence from cannabis has failed. The primary definition of efficacy does not reflect the goal of many patients seeking treatment for their cannabis use.
In fact, there are important signals of efficacy in clinical trials looking at reductions in cannabis use rather than abstinence as the primary endpoints. Quetiapine shifted heavy cannabis use (5–7 days/week) to moderate cannabis use (2–4 days/week; [227]). Similarly, as mentioned above, large RCTs for CUD that failed to demonstrate sustained abstinence showed that starting at week 5 of medication maintenance, patients shifted from heavy use (5–7 days/week) to moderate use (2–4 days/week) relative to placebo [192]. Lintzeris and colleagues [199] similarly showed that nabiximols, an oral mucosal spray containing THC and CBD reduced the number of days cannabis was used out of the 84-day study from 53 days in the placebo group to 35 days in the nabiximols group. Finally, maintenance on CBD alone also reduced cannabis use more than placebo (although the effect was small: ≤ half a day/week [178].
Patients are still using a significant amount of cannabis in these studies, albeit less than in the placebo condition, so understanding the clinical significance of these reductions in use is essential [228]. A recent secondary analysis of several RCTs, seeking to understand how much of a reduction in cannabis use is needed to see improvements in functional outcomes, showed that reductions of 50% in cannabis use days and 75% in cannabis use amounts (episodes or grams of use) were associated with reductions in cannabis-related problems and improvements in clinician-rated severity [229]. Showing that a substantial reduction in cannabis use has clinically meaningful consequences, in lieu of abstinence, and provides clear and testable hypotheses for future RCTs.
Overall, there have been a vast range of outcome measures in CUD studies [230], highlighting the need for standardized measurements outcomes. A recent international consortium that sought to identify a global consensus on standard measurement for outcomes in addiction [231] proposed a series of patient-centered outcome measures for substance-related disorders that may have particular relevance to a more bottom-up approach to cannabis treatment, i.e., being guided by what patients consider a meaningful change in their cannabis use rather than having clinicians dictate what an effective treatment looks like. This consortium, which included individuals with lived experience, recommended specific quality of life ratings, i.e., Substance Use Recovery Evaluator [232], that captures issues of particular relevance to substance use (e.g., coping and social support).
Regulatory (e.g., FDA) and funding bodies (e.g., NIDA) appear open to a discussion of non-abstinent endpoints [233,234]. The FDA has approved a treatment for alcohol use disorder that targets a reduction in heavy drinking days (not abstinence) because there are clinically meaningful health outcomes to reduced heavy drinking. This is more difficult to demonstrate for cannabis, which has less physiological toxicity than alcohol. In lieu of objective, physiological endpoints, it is likely that outcomes will have to be subjective, i.e., patient satisfaction; improvements in quality of life, consistent with a movement toward patient-reported outcomes. Kiluk and colleagues [233] make a compelling argument that measures that capture the negative psychosocial and health consequences of drug use, as opposed to overall functioning, are critical to capturing meaningful effects of reductions in use.
Additional issues to consider in translating preclinical and human laboratory findings:
Additional issues to consider when defining endpoints that define efficacy include: (1) CUD severity: Non-treatment-seeking individuals who use cannabis daily in human laboratory studies, almost by definition, do not view cannabis as causing significant problems in their lives so typically meet criteria for moderate not severe CUD. Yet patients seeking treatment are more likely to meet criteria for severe CUD, particularly if they are agreeing to take an experimental medication for weeks to months. Severe CUD would suggest that their cannabis use is more refractory and less responsive to interventions. On the other hand, there would be a low placebo response increasing the likelihood of a significant medication effect (see Brezing and Levin 2018; [170]); (2) Gender: Although not the focus of this review, sex differences exist in the response to cannabis and cannabinoids across species [235] and to medications tested for the treatment of CUD (see Brezing and Levin 2018, [170]; Brezing et al., 2024, [202]); (3) Co-morbidities: Those with a psychiatric diagnosis [236], alcohol and other substance use disorders [237], including tobacco use disorder [238,239], fare worse in cannabis treatment. Human laboratory studies typically exclude participants who meet criteria for alcohol use disorder, anxiety and depression, for example, whereas not all clinical trials do so. This impacts how medications alter cannabis use; (4) Patient goals: Evaluating the treatment goal of patients (abstinence versus reduction in use) and changes in specific aspects of quality of life that are important to patients needs to be integrated into measures of efficacy. Defining efficacy as abstinence is problematic when it is not what many patients are seeking in treatment [229,230], increasing the likelihood that most RCTs for CUD result in a false negative. The secondary analysis of large RCTs, demonstrating that several medications reduce the number of cannabis use days and amount of cannabis used, support integration of these meaningful, self-reported metrics of reduction as endpoints in future trials [192,240].
To conclude, while CUD medication development remains in its early stages, the tools we have—combined with continued refinement of preclinical models and clinical research strategies—are paving the way for more effective treatments. By accelerating translational research and optimizing our experimental approaches, we can increase throughput and improve the likelihood of identifying viable pharmacotherapies for people with CUD.