Introduction
Current Trends
Although cigarette use has declined over the past decade, nicotine use continues to be a major public health concern. In 2017, 9.7% of 12th graders (Schulenberg et al., 2018) and 22.3% of young adults (18-25) smoked cigarettes (Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality, 2018), and 11.0% of 12th graders and 6.6% of young adults used electronic nicotine vaporizers in the past month (Schulenberg et al., 2018). Among current (past month) cigarette smokers, 4.2% of 12th grade smokers (Schulenberg et al., 2018) and 38.4% of young adult (18-25) smokers (Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality, 2018) smoke cigarettes daily. The developing brain is particularly sensitive to nicotine, and chronic use during this time causes age-specific changes in neurochemistry, behavior, and mood (Yuan, Cross, Loughlin, & Leslie, 2015); thus, understanding the neurocognitive effects of chronic nicotine use in this age group is an important public health concern.
Effects of Nicotine on Receptors
Nicotine is an exogenous agonist of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) and initiates a signal transduction scheme that includes release of neurotransmitters including dopamine, norepinephrine, acetylcholine, serotonin, GABA, glutamate, and endorphins (Benowitz, 2009). nAChRs are involved in cognition (Levin & Simon, 1998), and are widespread throughout the brain, including in the thalamus, basal ganglia, cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum (Brody et al., 2006; Levin & Simon, 1998). Nicotine cigarette smoking causes near-complete saturation of nAChRs with chronic exposure leading to desensitization and up-regulation of nAChRs (Wang & Sun, 2005). Receptor density does normalize after as little as two months of abstinence (Breese et al., 1997).
Effects of Nicotine on Cognition
Acutely, nicotine and nAChR partial agonists increase concentration (Conners et al., 1996; Levin, Conners, Silva, Canu, & March, 2001; Levin et al., 1996), attention (Bekker, Bocker, Van Hunsel, van den Berg, & Kenemans, 2005; Conners et al., 1996; Newhouse, Potter, & Singh, 2004), behavioral inhibition (Bekker et al., 2005; Potter & Newhouse, 2004, 2008), memory, fine motor abilities, and working memory (Heishman, Kleykamp, & Singleton, 2010). In adults, chronic use is associated with poorer cognitive outcomes, especially in older (>45 years) smokers compared to younger smokers (≤45 years; Paul et al., 2006). While exceptions are few in rodent (French, Granholm, Moore, Nelson, & Bimonte-Nelson, 2006; Uzum, Diler, Bahcekapili, Tasyurekli, & Ziylan, 2004) and human (White & Levin, 2004) research, studies in adults to date have found that chronic nicotine exposure is associated with poorer outcomes in visual attention, impulsivity (Wagner et al., 2013), psychomotor speed, and cognitive flexibility (Kalmijn, van Boxtel, Verschuren, Jolles, & Launer, 2002). Notably, acute administration of nicotine still results in increased attention and behavioral inhibition in chronic users (Semenova, Stolerman, & Markou, 2007), which may reinforce chronic use despite cognitive deficits.
Chronic Effects of Nicotine on Neuropsychological Functioning in Adolescence
Adolescence and young adulthood is a time of dynamic neural development, with ongoing pruning of gray matter (Giedd et al., 1999; Giorgio et al., 2010; Giorgio et al., 2008; Sowell, Thompson, Tessner, & Toga, 2001; Yuan et al., 2015), and improved quality of white matter (Ashtari et al., 2007; Barnea-Goraly et al., 2005; Giorgio et al., 2010; Giorgio et al., 2008; Schmithorst, Wilke, Dardzinski, & Holland, 2002; Yuan et al., 2015). Further, the developing brain is particularly sensitive to nicotine (Yuan et al., 2015); chronic use results in age-specific changes in neurotransmitter turnover, receptors, neurons, cell death, behavior, and mood (Slotkin, 2002; Yuan et al., 2015).
Despite the sensitivity of the adolescent brain to nicotine, few animal and human studies have examined the chronic effects of nicotine use on cognition in adolescents and young adults. Animal models have shown that chronic administration of nicotine during adolescence results in deficits in short- and long-term potentiation (Han, An, Yang, Si, & Zhang, 2014) and persistent (up to five weeks) deficits in visuo-spatial attention (Counotte et al., 2011; Counotte et al., 2009) and impulse control (Counotte et al., 2009). The few human studies on this topic have also revealed negative effects of chronic nicotine exposure in youth. Adolescent and young adult smokers typically have lower IQs (Fried, Watkinson, & Gray, 2006; Weiser, Zarka, Werbeloff, Kravitz, & Lubin, 2010) and exhibit poorer attention (Chamberlain, Odlaug, Schreiber, & Grant, 2012; Jacobsen et al., 2005; Yakir et al., 2007), working memory (Chamberlain et al., 2012; Jacobsen et al., 2005), and executive functioning (Chamberlain et al., 2012; Yakir et al., 2007) compared to their nonsmoking counterparts. One study, however, found no differences in cognitive performance between smokers and nonsmokers (Dinn, Aycicegi, & Harris, 2004). It should be noted that in most samples, marijuana use was not measured (Dinn et al., 2004; Weiser et al., 2010; Yakir et al., 2007), or if measured, past year use was not limited (Jacobsen et al., 2005). Not controlling for marijuana represents a significant limitation of previous studies given that nicotine and cannabis use are highly comorbid (Agrawal, Budney, & Lynskey, 2012) and cannabis use is associated with neurocognitive deficits (Hanson et al., 2010; Jacobus & Tapert, 2014; Lisdahl, Gilbart, Wright, & Shollenbarger, 2013; Lisdahl & Price, 2012; Lisdahl, Wright, Kirchner-Medina, Maple, & Shollenbarger, 2014; McHale & Hunt, 2008; Pope, Gruber, Hudson, Huestis, & Yurgelun-Todd, 2001; Takagi et al., 2011). In summary, studies of adolescents and young adults find poorer cognition with chronic nicotine use, although these studies demonstrate some methodological limitations.
Gender and Nicotine Effects on Cognition
Studies examining the impact of chronic nicotine exposure on cognition generally find poorer cognitive effects in males chronically exposed to nicotine, with less consistent effects in females. Pre-clinically, Taylor and Maloney (2010) found that adult female rats chronically administered a low nicotine dose outperformed males on a visual spatial orientation paradigm. Another rodent study found worsened serial pattern learning in adulthood after chronic adolescent nicotine exposure in males, and poorer performance on violation elements in females (Pickens, Rowan, Bevins, & Fountain, 2013).
In humans, males demonstrate poorer cognitive outcomes with chronic nicotine use. After 24 hours of abstinence, young adult male smokers demonstrate worsened recognition memory compared to baseline, while females did not experience this effect; this difference was not seen while ad libitum smoking was allowed (Merritt, Cobb, & Cook, 2012). Similarly, adolescent male smokers had slower n-back task reaction time when 24 hours abstinent and, independent of withdrawal status, poorer selective and divided attention accuracy compared to females and male non-smokers (Jacobsen et al., 2005). With these few exceptions, few studies to date have examined gender differences in the impact of chronic nicotine exposure on cognition. Further, smokers in Jacobsen et al. (2005) had higher marijuana use than controls, and marijuana use was not limited, although participants were required to abstain from marijuana use for 4 weeks prior to the study. In summary, two studies have found that male smokers typically exhibit poorer cognition than females or male controls, although these findings need to be replicated.
Study Aims
Although few studies exist, preliminary research finds that chronic nicotine exposure in adolescence is associated with poorer attention, impulse control, various aspects of memory, and planning. However, most of this research has been done in animals; very few studies have been conducted in adolescent and young adult humans. Furthermore, virtually no studies have examined how gender impacts nicotine’s effects on cognitive functioning in youth. Therefore, we examined the independent and interactive effects of chronic nicotine use and gender on neuropsychological performance in adolescents and young adults ages 18-25 using a cross-sectional design. Further, unlike previous studies, the current study excluded participants with heavy (>60) past year marijuana use to lessen the confounding effects of polydrug use. The current study also forbade nicotine use within an hour of cognitive testing to prevent the cognitive improvements seen with acute nicotine use. We hypothesized that performance on attention, working memory, and verbal memory tasks would be poorer in nicotine users, and these effects would be most robust in male smokers.
Methods
Participants
In 2008-2011, 57 (21 nicotine users [9 male, 12 female] and 36 controls [19 male, 17 female]) right-handed adolescent and young adult participants ages 18-25 were recruited from a larger cross-sectional study that included neuroimaging [grant number and PI removed for blinding]. All protocols were approved by the Institutional Review Board at [name removed for blinding]. Inclusion criteria included: right-handedness; age 18-25; for the nicotine group, minimum twice-weekly cigarette, smokeless tobacco, hookah, and/or nicotine replacement, or weekly cigar, exposure in the past year; and for the control group, fewer than 5 nicotine exposures in the past year, never a regular smoker, and no exposure to regular second hand nicotine smoke. Exclusion criteria included: magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contraindications (claustrophobia, non-removable ferromagnetic metal in body); current pregnancy; history of chronic medical or neurological illness or injury (meningitis, HIV, epilepsy, brain tumor, traumatic brain injury, >2min loss of consciousness and concussion symptoms, stroke, cerebral palsy, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, uncontrolled high blood pressure, diabetes, chronic migraines); history of a learning disability or special education; complications during birth or premature birth; prenatal exposure to alcohol (>4 drinks/day or >7 drinks/week), nicotine (daily cigarette use for more than 1 month), or illicit drugs (>10 uses); current use of psychoactive medication; pre-existing DSM-IV Axis I disorders independent of substance use; >20 past year and >30 lifetime uses of any of the following drug categories: stimulants, inhalants, hallucinogens, sedatives, or opiates; >9 lifetime ecstasy uses; >60 past year cannabis joints; very heavy alcohol drinkers (>8 standard drinks per week on average); refusal to maintain abstinence from drugs and alcohol for 7 days before testing; and a WRAT-4 Reading t-score ≤ 80. Eligible participants were divided into controls (n=36) and nicotine users (n=21).
Procedure
Participants were recruited through advertisements in a local free newspaper and fliers. Those interested were screened by phone for exclusionary criteria. Further procedural detail has been described elsewhere [citation removed for blinding]. Briefly, a semi-structured interview based on DSM-IV-TR criteria for Axis I psychotic, anxiety, and mood disorders was administered (First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & Williams, 2001). Eligible participants provided written informed consent. All participants completed neuropsychological battery, drug use interview, questionnaires, toxicology screening, and MRI across one or two sessions. For those completing the study in two sessions, only the MRI and repeated toxicology/pregnancy testing were completed at the second session, 2-3 days after the first session. The MRI was completed as part of a larger parent study and imaging data is not used in the present study. Participants were paid $110 for one 4.5-hour session or $160 for two sessions, and all participants also received parking reimbursement, local substance treatment resources, and an image of their brain. All participants, regardless of nicotine group status, were allowed to smoke cigarettes up until one hour before cognitive testing but were required to abstain from drugs (including cannabis) and alcohol for 7 days prior to testing.
Measures
Toxicology and Pregnancy Testing
Participants were administered a urine toxicology screen using the One Step Drug Screen Test (Dip Card Panel; Innovacon, Inc., San Diego, CA); those who tested positive for drugs other than cannabis were excluded. Urine was checked for adulterants using the Specimen Validity Test (DrugTestStrips, Greenville, SC). NicAlert strips (Nymox Pharmaceutical Corporation, Hasbrouck Heights, NJ) detected cotinine (a metabolite of nicotine) in the urine to characterize recency of use. Participants were not excluded if positive for nicotine/cotinine. Participants were also given a breathalyzer test to assess recent alcohol use (Alco-Sensor IV; Intoximeters, Inc., St. Louis, MO); those who tested positive were excluded. All female participants were given a urine pregnancy test (HGC Pregnancy Test Card; DrugTestStrips, Greenville, NC) and were excluded if pregnant.
Drug Use
Past Year & Lifetime Patterns of Substance Use.
The Time-line Follow-Back (TLFB; Sobell, Maisto, Sobell, & Cooper, 1979) assessed past year and lifetime substance use in standard units—for nicotine: cigarettes, cigars, number of uses of smokeless tobacco and nicotine replacement therapy, and number of hits of hookah; standard drinks for alcohol; joints of cannabis; tablets of ecstasy; milligrams of methamphetamine, cocaine, and crack cocaine (cocaine was converted to lines at 10mg/line); number of hits for opioids (opium, heroin), hallucinogens (acid, peyote, LSD, PCP), and inhalants (glue, cleaners, paint, gas, nitrous oxide, etc.); pills for stimulants (Ritalin, Adderall, ephedrine); and pills or hits for sedatives (downers, ketamine, GHB, etc.). They were asked to recall their use of the drug(s) endorsed week-by-week over the past year, and month-by-month over their lifetime using a blank calendar to assist them. Holidays and days of personal significance were used to cue memories of drug and alcohol use. Past year nicotine use was used to divide participants into groups; other drug use information was used to exclude participants.
Withdrawal and SUD criteria.
The Customary Drinking and Drug Use Record (CDDR; S. A. Brown et al., 1998) assessed past year and lifetime substance use in standard units, as well as withdrawal, abuse/dependence (DSM-IV-TR criteria), and negative consequences of use. Abuse/dependence information was used for descriptive purposes.
Nicotine Dependence.
The Fagerstrom Test for Cigarette Dependence (FTCD; Fagerstrom, 2012; Heatherton, Kozlowski, Frecker, & Fagerstrom, 1991) was administered to assess severity of cigarette dependence for descriptive purposes. The FTCD is a six-item questionnaire (max score=10) with questions about number of cigarettes per day, difficulty refraining from smoking, and preferred time of day to smoke, among others (Heatherton et al., 1991). The FTCD does not give a standard score for determination of cigarette dependence (Moolchan et al., 2002); however, Heatherton et al. (1991) propose the following scoring criteria: 1-2=very low dependence; 3-4=low dependence; 5=medium dependence; 6-7=high dependence; 8-10=very high dependence.
Neuropsychological assessments
Premorbid verbal intelligence/quality of education
The Wide Range Achievement Test-4th Edition (WRAT-4) Reading subtest (Wilkinson, 2006) measured estimates of verbal intelligence and quality of education (Manly, Jacobs, Touradji, Small, & Stern, 2002) for group comparison purposes. Reading total score was used.
The following selected measures were used as dependent variables in the analyses.
Attention and Working Memory
The Paced Auditory Serial Attention Test (PASAT) is a sustained attention and working memory task in which participants must retain two serially presented numbers and perform a summation roughly every 2 seconds (Gronwall, 1977). PASAT total correct was used for the present study. Selective and sustained attention were measured with the Ruff 2 & 7 (Ruff & Allen, 1996). Total speed and total accuracy scores were used.
Executive Functioning
The Wisconsin Card Sorting Task (WCST) measures problem solving, set shifting, and ability to integrate feedback (Kongs, Thompson, Iverson, & Heaton, 2000); total correct was used. The D-KEFS Trail Making Test Condition 4 assessed sequencing ability and psychomotor speed (Delis, Kaplan, & Kramer, 2001). Condition 4 raw score was used. The D-KEFS Color Word Interference Test Inhibition condition total completion time assessed inhibitory control (Delis et al., 2001).
Memory
The California Verbal Learning Test—2nd edition (CVLT-II) assessed verbal memory and learning (Delis, Kramer, Kaplan, & Ober, 2000); trial 1, total recall, recognition discriminability, and short and long delay free recall were used.
Self-reported Mood
The Beck Depression Inventory—Second Edition (BDI-II; (Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996) assessed self-reported depressive symptomology. Total raw score was used. Depressed mood is associated with cognitive deficits (Castaneda, Tuulio-Henriksson, Marttunen, Suvisaari, & Lonnqvist, 2008), and young adults who use substances (Brook, Brook, Zhang, Cohen, & Whiteman, 2002), including nicotine (Breslau, Kilbey, & Andreski, 1991), have higher rates of depression. Thus, although participants with depressive disorders were excluded from the study, the BDI-II was included to examine depressive symptoms in the sample to assure depressive symptoms were not explaining differences in cognition.
Statistical Analysis
A series of multiple regressions was conducted using nicotine group and nicotine group by gender interaction as the primary independent variables to examine associations with neuropsychological scores, covarying for gender; dfBeta weights were examined for the primary independent variables and one significant outlier (standardized dfBeta > 2; Stevens, 2009) was removed from all demographic information and statistical analyses. Significance was determined if p≤.05. Post-hoc power analyses were conducted using G*Power (Faul, Erdfelder, Lang, & Buchner, 2007).
Results
Demographic and mood information
See Table 1 for means, standard deviations and ranges for all demographic and drug use variables split into male and female nicotine users and controls. ANOVAs and Chi-squares revealed that there were no group differences in age [F(3,53)=0.57, p=.64], ethnicity [64.9% Caucasian, χ2(12)=7.60, p=.82], WRAT-4 Reading standard score [F(3,53)=0.89, p=.45], years of education [F(3,53)=0.87, p=.46], or Beck Depression Inventory-2 total score [F(3,53)=0.14, p=.93].
Drug use
Of the nicotine users, 90.5% (n=19) received 95% or more of past year nicotine exposures from cigarettes. One male participant used hookah nearly weekly in addition to a daily pack of cigarettes, and another male participant consistently used cigarettes, cigars, smokeless tobacco, and hookah throughout the year. There was no past year nicotine replacement therapy use in the sample. Of the nicotine users, 76.2% (n=16) met DSM-IV-TR criteria for nicotine dependence, and 4.8% (n=1) met DSM-IV-TR criteria for nicotine abuse. Average FTCD score of the nicotine users was 2.8, equating to low/very low dependence.
Both male and female nicotine users had significantly higher past year cigarette use [F(3,53)=22.42, p<.001] and cotinine level [F(3,53)=100.26, p<.001] than controls. Male nicotine users had a trend towards higher hookah use [F(3,53)=2.71, p=.054], although this marginal effect is driven by one male nicotine user. Female nicotine users exhibited significantly higher past year other drug use [F(3,53)=3.40, p=.02] than controls; however, this effect is driven by one female nicotine user with 13 past year other drug uses. No significant differences were found between groups on past year cigar [F(3,53)=2.40, p=.08], smokeless tobacco [F(3,53)=2.25, p=.09], cannabis [F(3,53)=1.03, p=.39], alcohol [F(3.53)=2.39, p=.08], or ecstasy [F(3,53)=1.27, p=.30] use, age of first cigarette use [F(3,26)=1.71, p=.19], or (between male/female nicotine users) FTCD score [F(1,19)=2.95, p=.10].
Primary Findings
After covarying for gender, nicotine group was not associated with performance on any measure. However, D-KEFS Trails Condition 4 nearly achieved significance [β=−.26, t(55)=−1.97, p=.054, f2=0.17], with nicotine users having marginally poorer performance than controls. The gender x nicotine group interaction was significantly associated with performance on the CVLT-II Trial 1 [β=.26, t(55)=2.01, p=.050, f2=0.08; Figure 1], short delay free recall [β=.26, t(55)=2.07, p=.04, f2=0.08; Figure 2], and long delay free recall [β=.35, t(55)=2.76, p=.01, f2=0.14; Figure 3]. Visual inspection revealed that male smokers demonstrated poorer performance on short and long delay free recall compared to male controls. Conversely, female smokers outperformed female controls on Trial 1 and long and short delay free recall. Additionally, the gender*nicotine group interaction was marginally associated with PASAT performance [β=.24, t(55)=1.89, p=.06; f2=0.07], with male nicotine users exhibiting marginally poorer performance than male controls.
Discussion
The aim of the present study was to examine whether chronic nicotine cigarette use in young adulthood was associated with poorer neuropsychological functioning, and whether gender moderated these effects. Inconsistent with most previous studies (Chamberlain et al., 2012; Jacobsen et al., 2005; Weiser et al., 2010; Yakir et al., 2007), the present study did not find differences between nicotine users and controls on attention, working memory, and executive functioning tasks. However, nicotine users performed marginally more poorly (p=.054) on a psychomotor speed and sequencing test (D-KEFS Trails Condition 4) than controls. We only had approximately 44% power to detect this effect due to a small effect size of the finding (f2=0.07). A sample of 115 participants would be necessary to achieve 80% power. It is possible that other studies found differences in cognition between nicotine users and controls due to their samples being predominantly male (Chamberlain et al., 2012; Weiser et al., 2010} or not measuring (Weiser et al., 2010; Yakir et al., 2007) or excluding for (Jacobsen et al., 2005) cannabis use. Males often experience more deleterious effects of chronic nicotine use than females (Jacobsen et al., 2005; Koylu, Demirgoren, London, & Pogun, 1997; Merritt et al., 2012; Trauth, Seidler, McCook, & Slotkin, 1999), and cannabis use is associated with neurocognitive deficits (Hanson et al., 2010; Jacobus & Tapert, 2014; Lisdahl et al., 2013; Lisdahl & Price, 2012; Lisdahl et al., 2014; McHale & Hunt, 2008; Pope et al., 2001; Takagi et al., 2011). The present study contained a relatively even number of males and females and limited past year marijuana use. However, it is also likely that no significant effects were found in the present study due to lack of power or differences in effect sizes between younger adolescents and young adults (Lisdahl et al., 2013).
The gender by nicotine group interaction was associated with verbal memory performance. Male smokers performed more poorly than male controls on verbal short and long delay free recall. Female smokers outperformed female controls on Trial 1 and short and long delay free recall. To our knowledge, this pilot study is the first to preliminarily report a significant effect of nicotine and gender on verbal memory in this age group (18-25). Similar studies (Chamberlain et al., 2012; Dinn et al., 2004) did not examine verbal memory in their batteries, or did examine verbal memory but not the gender interaction (Jacobsen et al., 2005). Fried et al. (2006) examined auditory memory in young adult smokers and non-smokers with the Wechsler Memory Scales-3rd Ed. (WMS-III; Wechsler, 1997) but did not examine gender effects.
Further, male smokers exhibited marginally poorer performance than male controls on a sustained attention and working memory task. However, we only had approximately 50% power to detect these effects due to a relatively small effect size of both findings (f2=0.07); a sample of 115 participants would be necessary to achieve 80% power. Given that our findings are marginally significant, this may be due to differences in effect sizes between younger adolescents and young adults (Lisdahl et al., 2013). These findings are also consistent with a previous report on adolescent (14-18) male smokers, who reacted more slowly in a working memory task while abstinent and in attention tasks regardless of withdrawal status (Jacobsen et al., 2005).
In summary, male cigarette smokers exhibited poorer performance than male controls on a verbal memory measure, and marginally poorer performance on a sustained attention and working memory task. Consistent with this, young adult male smokers exhibited poorer recognition memory after abstinence, while females did not (Merritt et al., 2012). While effects are unclear in females, males develop increased nAChR densities, which remain even after a month of abstinence from chronic administration in adolescent rats (Koylu et al., 1997; Mochizuki et al., 1998; Trauth et al., 1999), which may explain the poorer performance in males. Females, however, demonstrated better performance on the verbal memory measure. Research regarding the relationship between menstrual cycle phase, nicotine use, and cognition may explain this finding. Women in the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle experience dampened effects of nicotine and improved cognitive performance on an attention measure (DeVito, Herman, Waters, Valentine, & Sofuoglu, 2014). Other research suggests that estrogen enhances nicotine’s cognitive-enhancing effects (Taylor & Maloney, 2010). However, these possible explanations are solely hypothesis without hormone data; additional studies should study the impact of menstrual cycle on these results.
Limitations of the current study must be considered. This study used a cross-sectional design, which does not allow for determination of the cause of the neurocognitive deficits seen in male smokers. It is possible that males with cognitive deficits initiate smoking to improve cognition, or that females continue to smoke following cognitive enhancement, which could reinforce use (Campos, Serebrisky, & Castaldelli-Maia, 2016). Indeed, cognitive effects of acutely administered nicotine depend on baseline performance (Niemegeers et al., 2014). Additionally, the nicotine group in the present study is relatively small—21 users. Thus, this study should be considered preliminary in nature. Prospective longitudinal studies with larger sample sizes are needed to adequately determine causation. Another potential limitation is the use of self-report measures (e.g. TLFB) to assess past year nicotine use. However, the TLFB is a reliable and valid measure of nicotine use, with high reliability when TLFB nicotine use is compared to daily self-monitoring of cigarette use (R. A. Brown et al., 1998). Additionally, cotinine levels were measured to assess recent nicotine exposure. It is also notable that this sample contained primarily tobacco cigarette smokers; with the prevalence of electronic cigarette use (Schulenberg et al., 2018), these findings may not generalize to e-cigarette or smokeless tobacco users. Cytotoxic chemicals in cigarette smoke may trigger neuroinflammation (Khanna, Guo, Mehra, & Royal, 2013) and oxidative stress in the brain (Durazzo, Meyerhoff, & Nixon, 2010; Khanna et al., 2013), which may contribute to poorer cognitive performance seen in cigarette smokers. Indeed, cigarette smoke extract caused mitochondrial damage in mouse brains while nicotine alone did not (Yang & Liu, 2003). Moreover, although the nicotine users primarily used cigarettes, and 76.2% of users met criteria for nicotine dependence, the use of the FTCD to characterize severity nicotine dependence may be limited in scope. The FTCD primarily asks questions regarding cigarette use, and this information may not generalize to the participants that used a variety of tobacco products. However, the CDDR dependence questions ask about all nicotine product use, so dependence should be well characterized in our sample across both measures. Also, nicotine users averaged 10.07 cigarettes per day; findings may be more robust in heavy daily cigarette users. Moreover, hourly smoking abstinence data was not collected on the whole sample; future studies should experimentally manipulate the abstinence period to examine its impact on cognition. Finally, hormone levels and menstrual phase were not collected; future research should examine the impact of these factors on the cognitive effects of nicotine use in young adults.
Conclusions
The effects of chronic nicotine cigarette use on cognitive functioning in young adulthood vary by gender in this pilot study, furthering understanding of nicotine’s unique effects on the developing brain. We found marginal relationships between nicotine status and sequencing ability and sustained attention, although a larger sample size is needed to confirm these findings. Female smokers exhibited better performance than female controls on a verbal memory measure, while male smokers demonstrated worse performance than male controls on the measure. Future studies should investigate causality using longitudinal designs, unlike the cross-sectional design used in the present study. Further work should also examine gender differences in underlying brain structure and function in verbal memory and sustained attention networks in young adult nicotine cigarette users.