Introduction
Women historically have a lower prevalence of cannabis use than men.1,2 Further, men tend to use a greater variety of cannabis products, including more prevalent use of high-potency cannabis products,2 and are at increased risk of certain cannabis-related harms such as driving under the influence of cannabis.1 Coupled with historical cultural associations between masculinity and being “high”,2,3 the higher prevalence of substance use among men has been used as justification to exclude women from substance use research.2–4
Yet, recent findings have highlighted a narrowing of the sex/gender gap in cannabis use prevalence.1 For example, the ratio of men-to-women using cannabis in the past month in the United States (US) declined from a high of 2.125 in 2002 to a low of 1.25 in 2020—which seems to be largely driven by an increase in women's cannabis use.5 Even more strikingly, youth data from Ontario show that, as of 2023, girls actually have a higher prevalence of cannabis use than boys.6 Furthermore, data from the US and Canada have suggested that cannabis legalization has led to a sharper increase in cannabis-related hospitalizations in women compared to men.1 For example, a cross-sectional study in Ontario found that the expansion of Canadian cannabis legalization in 2020 (including the legalization of edible products) was associated with a large increase in cannabis-related emergency department visits among women aged 18–44 years.7
Despite these shifts, male research participants are still over-represented in cannabis research. A recent review found that between 2000 and 2014, 77% of participants in published cannabis trials were identified as male.8 This clear sex/gender disparity in cannabis research is increasing in public health relevance as both use of cannabis and potential harms associated with use are increasing in women and girls.
One approach to better understand the health effects of cannabis is to examine the impact of sex on acute responses to cannabis using a human behavioural pharmacology paradigm. Sex is an umbrella term that refers to complex biological factors, including chromosomes, genes, hormones, and all their downstream effects. Sex-related biological processes have widespread physiological effects (e.g., modulation of the central nervous system) and can affect the way that drugs interact with bodies.9 Gonadal hormones like estrogens, progestogens, and androgens, which are differentially expressed across sexes, can influence drug-seeking behaviours in rodents and the experience of subjective drug states in humans.10–13 In animal models, female rodents show greater self-administration of cannabinoids than male rodents, yet this sex difference is reduced by ovariectomy (removal of the ovaries, and thus dramatic reduction in estrogen).14 Therefore, sex-related biological processes likely have a significant impact on acute responses to cannabis and long-term health effects of cannabis use.
However, it is important that we do not conflate sex with gender, another umbrella term that refers to socially constructed meaning about sexed bodies and includes dimensions such as identity and norms. Although sex alone (in the absence of gender) can influence some biological outcomes, such as prostate or ovarian cancers, the reality is that sex and gender are entangled in complex ways.15,16 Social determinants such as food security, housing, employment, and education all affect the distribution of health and wellbeing and are all gendered.15 These gendered social determinants affect individuals at complex biological levels, which is sometimes referred to as “embodiment” or “biological embedding”,15 and can directly influence brain health and function.17 Transdiagnostic risk factors for mental health and substance use disorders such as childhood maltreatment, stressful life events, and experiences of racial and other minority stressors are all subject to sex- and gender-related variability in both prevalence and in direct impacts on the brain.17 Furthermore, some humans have a configuration of sex and gender that does not fit into the simplified binary systems historically employed in the biomedical sciences. Transgender and gender-diverse (TGD) people have a gender identity and/or expression that does not align with the sex they were assigned at birth, while intersex people have a complement of sex characteristics that do not fit into historical definitions of “female” or “male”. TGD people are very rarely included in cannabis use research, despite TGD adults having significantly higher prevalence of cannabis use than cisgender adults,18 and virtually nothing is known about cannabis use in intersex people. We will explore these issues as caveats of this research approach throughout this article.
In a recent systematic review,19 we examined evidence from peer-reviewed articles for sex differences in the acute effects of cannabis on cognitive performance in humans. We identified 29 articles that met our inclusion criteria, just six of which found any evidence that female and male participants show different cognitive performance changes after acute exposure to cannabis. While this could be interpreted as evidence that sex has minimal influence on the acute cognitive effects of cannabis, our results could be alternatively interpreted to reflect the growing need for hypothesis-driven sex-based approaches in experimental substance use research.
The goal of this Commentary is to outline current issues in sex- and gender-informed human behavioural pharmacology of cannabis, using our systematic review as an example of the scope of existing evidence, and to advocate for future research priorities to better characterize the role of sex (and potentially gender) in modulating acute responses to psychoactive drugs. We note that while our systematic review focused on cognitive outcomes specifically, this article will focus more broadly on acute responses to cannabis. Furthermore, our focus is primarily on sex differences research as this is the most common approach employed in human laboratory studies of cannabis effects, but we emphasize that sex differences research is just one example of a broader array of sex- and gender-informed research approaches.
Prior review
A full description of our methods for the systematic review can be found in our previous publication.19 Our review followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines 20 and was pre-registered with PROSPERO (registration ID CRD42024547066). We included studies of adults aged 18 years or older who were considered to be healthy volunteers (i.e., not sampled from a patient population). Articles had to assess sex differences in the acute effects of cannabis/THC on cognition (i.e., in the hours after administration).
We conducted full-text screening of 169 articles and 29 were included in the final synthesis.21 –49 Six out of the 29 included articles (20.7%) found at least some statistical evidence for sex differences in acute cognitive effects of cannabis/THC, with generally greater cognitive effects in female participants.26,31,34,39,45,48
Current issues
In writing our systematic review, we noted one overarching limitation was the lack of hypothesis-driven sex differences research in the cannabis field. This is likely due to the low number of studies that planned to examine sex differences; across the 29 articles included in our review, just two studies clearly identified a sex difference analysis as the primary aim of the study,21,22 while nine studies conducted a secondary sex differences analysis of one or more larger parent studies,23,24,28–30,35,36,47,49 and the remaining 21 studies did not specify an aim related to sex. See Table 1 for an overview of study characteristics discussed in this section of the Commentary.
Characteristics of included journal articles.
Note: M: number of male participants; F: number of female participants; Tot: total number of participants in sample.
Aim: Was a sex differences analysis the primary aim of the study (PRI), a secondary analysis of one or more parent studies (SEC), or not clearly articulated as an aim of the study at all (NO)?
Power: Was a sex comparison considered in an a priori sample size calculation?
Design: Was sex considered in the design of the study (e.g., drug exposure visits scheduled during one menstrual cycle phase only)?
Define: Were sex or gender defined in the article?
Measure: Was a specific measure(ment) of sex or gender clearly articulated in the article?
Baseline: Was there a sex comparison of baseline measures (e.g., demographics or substance use characteristics)?
We focus on four specific issues: (1) the lack of studies powered to examine sex differences, which precludes making any firm conclusions about study results given dramatic variability both within and between sex categories; (2) the lack of clarity of sex and gender language; (3) the lack of consideration of within-sex variability; and (4) the lack of attention to social and behavioural variables that co-vary with sex.
Lack of a priori consideration of statistical power
Statistical power is a complex topic in sex differences research, as many researchers are reluctant to incorporate sex into their experimental design due to misconceptions about insufficient power.50 To address this misconception, Phillips and colleagues 51 ran simulations on artificial datasets to examine the results of different scenarios where a treatment effect is examined in two sexes. In brief, they found that in some scenarios (i.e., where there is a baseline sex difference or when treatment effects are similar across sexes), incorporating sex into a factorial analysis does not decrease power to detect a treatment effect.51 While they did find that power to detect a main treatment effect significantly decreased when there was a large sex by treatment interaction (e.g., opposing effects in each sex), there was still high power to detect the sex by treatment interaction itself.51 However, it is important to note that power calculations for interaction terms are complex and depend on numerous factors, including effect sizes of the simple slopes, the study design (e.g., parallel groups or crossover), and the shape of the interaction (e.g., a reversed interaction where the treatment effect is opposite in both subgroups, or a fully attenuated interaction where the treatment effect is zero in one group and large in the other).52 Thus, power considerations are imperative to consider in sex differences research where the goal is to examine an interaction term (e.g., a sex by treatment interaction), especially where we expect the interaction term is non-trivial.
Out of 29 articles included in our systematic review, none included an a priori power calculation that considered a sex comparison. Overall sample sizes (including male and female participants) ranged from n = 9 33 to n = 438,39 while male-to-female ratios ranged from 0.70 21 to 8.32 Across 32 samples (some articles included multiple study samples), 23 had more male than female participants, four had exactly equal numbers of male and female participants, and five had more female than male participants. Thus, more than 70% of study samples had more males than females, and just four of 32 samples (12.5%) had an equal number of male and female participants. This is noteworthy as power to detect an interaction decreases as sample sizes across subgroups become more unequal.52 Furthermore, there were seven samples with fewer than 10 participants in either the male or female groups. With small samples sizes, only a large magnitude effect would yield a significant result, which is unlikely to be the case.
In summary, power issues are complex in sex differences research, and yet have not been adequately considered in human laboratory studies of acute cannabis effects. Issues such as small sample sizes, unequal numbers in each sex group, and insufficient power to detect a significant sex by treatment condition interaction all likely obfuscate potential sex effects in cannabis research.
Lack of clarity in sex and gender language
To conduct rigorous sex and gender research, it is essential to ensure clear recording, measurement, and reporting of sex and/or gender, which requires that authors provide a definition of the sex or gender variable used in their analysis and a description of how that variable was measured.53 In the simplest scenario, this would mean using a demographics questionnaire that includes the question, “Were you assigned female, male, or intersex at birth”? Unfortunately, this important step in sex and gender research is often skipped, which is likely due to the historical conflation of sex and gender terms and lack of understanding of appropriate sex and gender terminology. Indeed, just two studies included in our review 21,24 defined sex (as sex assigned at birth). Despite the definition offered, one article 21 proceeded to refer to female participants as women and male participants as men, a practice that both conflates sex and gender and also risks misclassifying individuals who are transgender or gender-diverse. Furthermore, these same two studies 21,24 were the only studies to explicitly state how sex or gender were measured (both mentioned self-report of sex assigned at birth). Without clarity about how sex and/or gender were defined, measured, or recorded, we do not know with certainty that participants were appropriately classified according to their sexed characteristics or gender identity.
In summary, researchers should ensure that they provide a clear definition of sex and/or gender, describe how these variables were measured, and ensure that each participant is allocated to a sex or gender group that accurately reflects their physiological and lived experience. Unfortunately, these steps are not reflected in current human laboratory studies of acute cannabis effects.
Lack of consideration of within-sex variability
Although sex differences research is a useful approach for examining high-level subgroup differences (i.e., comparing “females” to “males”), it is erroneous to assume that “sex” itself is causally affecting study endpoints; rather, it is one or more sex-related variables (e.g., gonadal hormone levels, downstream sex chromosome effects) or other variables that co-vary with sex (e.g., gendered variables) that drive differences. For example, ovarian hormones such as estradiol and progesterone fluctuate across hormonal cycles (e.g., the estrous cycle in rodents, the menstrual cycle in humans) and this can cause significant variability in outcomes such as mood and substance use.11,12,54 Research in animal models has demonstrated how this can lead to “masked” sex differences, where female and male rodents do not differ when directly compared but females show significant differences at high- versus low-estradiol phases of the hormonal cycle.54 It is feasible that this is true in human studies as well, where lack of consideration of menstrual cycle stage can mask potential sex differences in responses to cannabis. Of the 29 studies included in our review, just two considered menstrual cycle phase and/or use of hormonal contraceptives. While two studies is too few to establish a pattern, it is still worth noting that both studies found significant sex differences. Aghaei and colleagues 21 included female participants taking hormonal contraception or scheduled THC exposure visits in the early follicular phase of the menstrual cycle. Doss and colleagues 26 excluded female participants taking hormonal contraceptives and scheduled THC exposure visits when menstruating participants were in the follicular phase of the cycle. Thus, reducing within-sex variability (e.g., variability related to the menstrual cycle) may increase the likelihood of detecting binary sex differences, if they do exist.
Further consideration of other sex-related factors (e.g., diurnal fluctuations in androgen levels or life-course fluctuations in gonadal hormones, such as menopause or previous pregnancy) may be necessary to clarify sex differences in acute responses to cannabis. Importantly, all gonadal hormones show significant life course changes (e.g., the significant drop in estrogens at menopause), which underscores the need to take a lifespan approach in sex differences research.50 All 29 of the articles included in our review included participant samples with mean ages in the 20s. Thus, we currently do not have any evidence to assess how sex differences in acute responses to cannabis might differ at different life stages, such as menopause or andropause.
In summary, we know that sex-related variables such as gonadal hormone levels show regular fluctuations, both in the short term (e.g., across the human menstrual cycle) and the long term (e.g., with ageing), yet these considerations are not currently considered in human laboratory studies of acute cannabis effects.
Lack of sex-disaggregated baseline and demographic data
When conducting a sex difference analysis, it is essential to ensure that sex groups are similar in terms of key demographic variables (e.g., age, race/ethnicity) and cannabis-related variables (e.g., past cannabis exposure, current cannabis use frequency, presence or absence of CUD symptoms). This is particularly important since we know that there are significant sex and gender differences in frequency of cannabis use, types of products used, age of initiation of cannabis use, and experience of CUD symptoms.1,9 Of the 29 articles included in our review, 11 articles included at least one sex comparison of baseline characteristics. This means that 18 articles (62%) did not show any sex-disaggregated data or examine differences in baseline characteristics that could explain potential sex differences in outcomes (e.g., female and male participants might have very different past exposures to cannabis, which could mask sex differences in acute outcome data).
In summary, we know that there are numerous variables that co-vary with sex (i.e., systematically differ between people of different sex categories), yet are not consistently or thoroughly considered in human laboratory studies of acute cannabis effects.
Summary of current issues
Taken together, these methodological limitations add the following complexity to interpretation of the existing evidence for sex differences in the acute effects of cannabis. First, we do not know whether groups of female and male participants were of sufficient number to detect a statistically significant group difference, if one does exist. Second, limitations with measurement and reporting of sex and gender variables mean that we are not confident that all participants fell into a group that best matches their physiology and lived experience. Third, we know that there is meaningful variability within sex categories (e.g., hormonal fluctuations) that is not accounted for in the study design. Finally, we do not know whether the groups of female and male participants had similar social identities and lived experiences, which could meaningfully influence the way that they respond to cannabis. Thus, we argue that, at present, we do not have sufficient evidence to conclude whether sex has a meaningful impact on the acute effects of cannabis.
Future research directions
To move forward, we will need laboratory studies of the acute effects of cannabis that consider sex in their factorial analysis (whether powered or not to do so), as this evidence continues to shine light on potential sex differences to be explored in future studies. However, this approach is not sufficient; it will take intentional, hypothesis-driven sex differences studies (and ultimately, studies that move beyond sex differences) to clarify the relationship between sex and acute responses to cannabis. Below, we highlight below some recommendations for future research that we hope will meaningfully advance the field.
Proper integration of sex-based analysis into study designs
Defining sex and gender variables, describing the method of sex and gender measurement, and ensuring equal (or nearly equal) sample sizes of subgroups (e.g., female and male participants) are simple strategies to improve the rigor of sex differences research.53 Measurement should ideally include a two-step question that asks about current gender identity and sex at birth (which includes an intersex option) to avoid misclassification of transgender, non-binary, and intersex participants.55,56 According to the Canadian 2021 Census, 0.33% of people in Canada aged 15 or older were transgender or non-binary, yet there were significant generational differences, with up to seven-fold greater proportions of transgender and non-binary people in younger generations. Similar figures for intersex people are more challenging to establish, given the complicated history of defining and measuring intersex traits.57,58 Thus, especially in human laboratory research, it is extremely unlikely that sex- and gender-neutral recruitment will lead to a sufficient number of transgender, non-binary, or intersex people to facilitate meaningful inclusion in a traditional factorial analysis. There are two strategies that we recommend to address this issue. First, presenting means and standard error for TGD or intersex groups in tables or supplementary material allows for meaningful inclusion of data even in cases when the absolute number of TGD or intersex participants is too small to include in formal analysis. Second, oversampling TGD or intersex participants could be warranted if in line with study hypotheses and will allow for formal statistical analysis.
Future studies need to ensure to collect adequate information about baseline characteristics, including age, use of exogenous hormones (e.g., hormonal contraceptives, gender-affirming hormones, anabolic steroid use), and history of cannabis and other substance use, that could contribute to sex-related variability in outcome data.
To produce the highest-quality evidence that has the greatest capacity to generate sex-informed policy and treatment approaches, future sex differences studies need to conduct a priori power calculations for the sex by treatment interaction term. This is challenging to do at the present moment, since the current body of evidence is not clear about the nature of sex by treatment interactions in cannabis studies (e.g., whether there is a significant interaction at all, and if so, what the shape of the interaction is).
In summary, we recommend that future studies include accurate and precise measurement of both sex and gender, include TGD and intersex participants in a meaningful way, collect sufficient baseline data to accurately describe differences in sex or gender groups, and consider a priori sample size calculations based on sex by condition interaction terms, where applicable.
Consideration of within-sex variability and life course
At present, there is relatively robust evidence that the human menstrual cycle impacts responses to alcohol, nicotine, and psychostimulants,11,12,59 yet considerably less is known about hormone-related variability in cannabis responses. Some animal evidence suggests differential responses to cannabinoids across phases of the estrous cycle, with greater behavioural responses in phases marked by higher ovarian hormone levels,60,61 yet only one prior human study has examined these relationships, finding minimal influence of menstrual cycle phase on acute cardiovascular, biochemical, or subjective responses to oral THC.62 Thus, a priority for future research will be to consider how human menstrual cycle fluctuations in ovarian hormones may influence acute responses to THC, including a broader range of cognitive and performance outcomes.
It is important to emphasize that menstrual cycle variations in ovarian hormone concentrations are not the only source of gonadal hormone fluctuation that need to be considered. Androgens follow diurnal patterns in humans, such that testosterone levels are typically highest upon awakening and may drop by about 50% from morning to evening.63 In animal models, group-housed male rodents form social hierarchies, and experiments have found five-fold increases in testosterone levels in dominant males compared to subordinate males.64 Furthermore, a series of systematic reviews and meta-analyses have empirically demonstrated that, under baseline conditions, female and male animals show similar variability in most brain- and behaviour-related outcomes, dispelling the myth that females are inherently more variable due to the estrus cycle.65–67 Thus, hormone-related variability is not a “female problem”,68 and future studies should consider how day-level and month-level fluctuations in gonadal hormones can influence responses to cannabis in all sexes.
Finally, life course changes have not been accounted for in prior studies of sex differences in acute cannabis effects, which presents another opportunity for future research. A growing body of literature has demonstrated that endogenous gonadal hormone levels and exposure to exogenous hormones can influence hippocampal neurogenesis, major depressive disorder, and Alzheimer's disease.50 In addition to continuous changes in gonadal hormone levels with ageing, specific life course events such as pregnancy, menopause, and the use of hormonal contraceptives, menopausal hormone therapy, or gender-affirming hormone therapy all have significant effects on the human brain and its functions.50 To meaningfully advance cannabis research, we should look to the depression and memory fields for examples of meaningful integration of sex-based analysis, including a life course approach.
In summary, we recommend that future studies consider including measurement of hormonal variability at different levels: daily (e.g., to account for diurnal androgen fluctuations), monthly (e.g., to capture menstrual cycle variability), and lifespan (e.g., to account for pregnancy and menopause).
Integration of intersectional gender measurement
As noted earlier, sex and gender interact with one another in complex ways, which is sometimes referred to as “sex/gender entanglement”. For example, engaging in masculine-stereotyped behaviours can increase testosterone levels in both men and women.69 In a widely cited example of integrating sex and gender co-measurement into the human laboratory, Hausmann and colleagues 70 found complex effects of sex at birth, gender stereotypes, and testosterone levels on mental rotation task performance. Thus, future studies should consider how both sex- and gender-related factors may influence acute responses to cannabis in the human laboratory (including non-cognitive outcomes, such as subjective drug effects and physiological effects). The reader is directed to several chapters in a recent book that explore sex/gender entanglement and related measurement and study design issues in far greater detail.71
In addition to sex/gender entanglement, there is increasing recognition of the necessity to examine how gender intersects with other social positions (e.g., race, sexuality, age) to influence human health.72 Intersectional disparities were identified in the article by Barkholtz and Bates we discussed earlier; not only were 77% of participants in cannabis trials published between 2000 and 2014 identified as male, but 100% of these male participants were also white.8 Furthermore, among cannabis trials that did report race (which was less than 50%), 83% of participants were identified as white.8 Beyond disparities in which participants are included in experimental cannabis research, there is also growing recognition of differences in cannabis use and cannabis-related harms among intersections of social identities. For example, survey studies considering the intersection of gender identity with sexual identity have found that bisexual women tend to have the highest prevalence of cannabis use.18 A recent study of 2021–2022 National Survey on Drug Use and Health data found that non-Hispanic multiracial lesbian/gay women had 6.87 higher odds of having a cannabis use disorder compared to white heterosexual women.73
In summary, we recommend that future sex- and gender-based analysis in the cannabis field should consider the complex interplay between sex-related biological factors and the gendered experiences of social determinants of health.
Clinical and policy implications
Ultimately, the goal of human behavioural pharmacology studies of cannabis effects is to inform both clinical practice (e.g., to help us better understand cannabis use disorders and potential treatment priorities) and policy (e.g., to support evidence-based lower-risk use guidelines). When this research is conducted naïve to sex and gender, important information is lost, and the historical male- and masculine-centric perspective of biomedical research is reinforced. For example, compared to men, women are less likely to be diagnosed with heart disease and are less likely to receive evidence-based care, which is due to a complex interplay of biological differences and gender bias.74 Similarly, sex- and gender-bias in cognitive task performance may lead to a 20% rate of misdiagnosis of amnesic mild cognitive impairment that could enhance the prediction of Alzheimer disease progression.50 Given the male bias in cannabis research participation 8 and growing evidence of a narrowing sex/gender gap in cannabis use prevalence that likely reflects increasing use by women and girls,6,75,76 it is imperative that future cannabis research integrates a sex and gender perspective.
Conclusion
While existing research provides limited and inconsistent evidence for sex differences in the acute effects of cannabis, this is likely due to methodological limitations rather than a definitive absence of differences. The underrepresentation of women and the near-total exclusion of transgender and gender-diverse individuals in cannabis research reflects longstanding gender biases in the field and likely leads to sex and gender disparities in diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of cannabis-attributable harms, as has been observed in cardiovascular and brain health research. Most studies to date have lacked hypothesis-driven sex-based aims, failed to ensure statistical power to detect sex by treatment interactions, and have not adequately defined or measured sex and gender variables. Moreover, minimal consideration has been given to within-sex variability, including the influence of hormonal fluctuations and life course factors (in all sexes). To advance a more complete and accurate understanding of cannabis effects, future studies must intentionally integrate sex and gender into every stage of research design and analysis. This includes clear operationalization and definition of sex and gender, careful attention to statistical power, consideration of hormonal and developmental variables, and an intersectional approach that accounts for the gendered social determinants of health. This approach is critical not only for scientific rigor, but for counteracting the historical andronormativity that has centered male bodies and experiences as the default in cannabis research, which has likely done disproportionate harm to cisgender women and girls and transgender, gender-diverse, and intersex youth and adults.