Introduction
People living with HIV (PLWH) report higher rates of cannabis use compared to the general U.S. population (23%−77% vs. 6.7%−44.5%; Compton et al., 2016; Mimiaga et al., 2013; Montgomery et al., 2019; Pacek et al., 2018; Prentiss et al., 2004). Both HIV (Alford & Vera, 2018; Cysique et al., 2004; Heaton et al., 2010, 2011, 2014) and cannabis use (Crane et al., 2013; Gonzalez et al., 2017) have been independently associated with neurocognitive impairment. However, limited research has investigated the neurocognitive effects of cannabis in PLWH.
While emerging research suggests a trend of neurocognitive impairment in acute and heavy cannabis use among PLWH, the literature is otherwise ambiguous (Norman & Basso, 2015; Lorkiewicz et al., 2018; Okafor et al., 2019; Thames et al., 2016). It is important to understand chronic neurocognitive effects of cannabis in PLWH, particularly given the extensive medicinal uses. Cannabis is widely used for HIV symptom management (e.g., nausea, pain, neuropathy, gastrointestinal problems, suppressed appetite, depression/anxiety; Costiniuk et al., 2019; Merlin et al., 2016; Montgomery et al., 2019; Park & Wu, 2017). Additionally, recent research, including in vitro, animal, and human observational studies, suggests cannabis may slow disease progression and reduce morbidity via modulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines and T-cell activation and attenuation of viral replication, though results are mixed and randomized-controlled trials are wanting (Charron & Leung, 2019; Costiniuk & Jenabian, 2019). Thus, while acute use may impair neurocognition, cannabis may also attenuate HIV symptoms and biomarkers, which are strongly related to neurocognition (Schouten et al., 2011). More research is needed to elucidate this complex relationship.
To this end, few studies have examined past cannabis use and neurocognition in PLWH. While the paucity of literature and methodological variability has prevented a consensus, most research suggests that past use does not significantly impact neurocognition in PLWH. Chang et al. (2006) found no effect of chronic cannabis use (current/past ≥ 12 months) on neurocognition in predominantly abstinent PLWH. In contrast, Gonzalez et al. (2011) demonstrated additive negative effects of HIV and past cannabis dependence (DSM-IV) on complex motor skills, but most of the comparison group, with intact performance, had a significant cannabis use history. Thus, findings may be confounded by characteristics of drug dependence, including heavier use, increased tolerance, compulsive use, impaired control, continued use despite physical/psychological problems, greater functional impairment, higher comorbidity rates, and withdrawal (American Psychiatric Association, 2000; Budney & Moore, 2002; Budney et al., 1999, 2003; Stephens et al., 1993; Zvolensky et al., 2006), all of which can impact neurocognition. Additionally, there were no between-group differences on procedural learning. Gonzalez et al. (2011) and Basso and Bornstein (2003) both found no interactive effects of HIV and past cannabis use on neurocognition. Basso and Bornstein (2003) specifically examined executive function and working memory in PLWH with and without past cannabis abuse/dependence. Recently, Lorkiewicz et al. (2018) found a negative neurocognitive effect (using self-report and a brief screen) of current (last 30 days), but not past, cannabis dependence among PLWH. Replication using more comprehensive and sensitive tests is warranted.
Other cross-sectional research suggests that cannabis may confer a neurocognitive benefit in PLWH. Byrd et al. (2011) found no link between polysubstance use history and neurocognitive impairment among PLWH, but higher cumulative past cannabis use was related to better verbal fluency. Thames et al. (2016) found that HIV-positive light current users outperformed HIV-negative light current users on verbal fluency, supporting a differential effect of cannabis in PLWH and possibly extending Byrd et al. (2011)’s findings. Together, results suggest that past and light current use are positively associated with verbal fluency and otherwise intact neurocognition in PLWH. Research should elucidate these findings across neurocognitive domains.
More research is needed to better understand the neurocognitive effects of past cannabis use in PLWH. The present study examined neurocognition in primarily Latinx PLWH with and without past cannabis use disorder (CUD+ and CUD-, respectively). Albeit limited, prior research suggests similar or better neurocognition in PLWH with past cannabis use compared to no past use. There is also evidence for neurobiological benefits of cannabis in PLWH. We therefore hypothesized that past CUD+ PLWH would demonstrate similar or better neurocognition compared to past CUD- PLWH.
Methods
Design, Setting, and Sample
This retrospective observational study included 138 PLWH who participated in a larger NIMH-funded study that examined ethnic disparities in medication adherence and factors related to adherence in Latinx and non-Hispanic white PLWH (PI: M. Rivera Mindt; K23MH079718). It was approved by the Institutional Review Boards (IRB) of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai and Fordham University. Participants were recruited via community outreach, self-referral, or through related studies and HIV clinics near East Harlem. All participants provided written informed consent.
Inclusion criteria included being HIV-positive (confirmed by medical records), ages 18–80, Latinx (any race) or non-Hispanic white ethnicity, English proficient, and on a stable dose of antiretroviral therapy for ≥12 weeks. Exclusion criteria included history of a severe psychiatric disorder (e.g., psychosis, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder) and/or significant non-HIV-related comorbid medical/neurological condition (e.g., advanced liver/renal disease, Parkinson’s disease, Lupus, Multiple Sclerosis, brain cancer/tumor, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, epilepsy). In this study, four participants with a current CUD were also excluded.
Data Collection
Participants completed DSM-IV-diagnostic interviews using the Composite International Diagnostic Interview Version 2.1 (CIDI; WHO, 1994), urine toxicology evaluations, and comprehensive, well-validated neuropsychological evaluations. HIV information was obtained via blood draws (for CD4 count, viral load), self-report, and medical records. Participants also completed self-report measures of depression (Beck Depression Inventory-II; Beck et al., 1996), socioeconomic status (SES; Hollingshead, 1975), and physical and mental health (Medical Outcomes Study HIV Health Survey; Wu et al., 1991, 1997).
Cannabis Use
Substance use was measured via DSM-IV-diagnostic interview using the CIDI 2.1 (WHO, 1994) and urine toxicology evaluations. The CIDI 2.1 documents past and current (last 30 days) cannabis use disorder. Our sample included PLWH with and without a past cannabis use disorder (CUD+ and CUD-, respectively) who did not meet criteria for a current CUD.
Neurocognition
Measures of attention/working memory, processing speed, executive functioning, verbal fluency, learning, memory, and motor ability were administered by trained psychometrists, supervised by a board-certified clinical neuropsychologist; demographically-corrected T-scores were obtained. Table 1 summarizes the neuropsychological test battery and normative data by domain.
Premorbid intellectual functioning was measured using the Wide Range Achievement Test, Third Edition (WRAT-3) Reading subtest, a test of single word reading with adequate reliability and validity (Wilkinson, 1993). It is also a valid measure of quality of education in multi-ethnic populations (Constantino et al., 2007). This subtest was included in a priori covariate analyses.
Statistical Analyses
One-way ANCOVAs were conducted to examine the effect of past cannabis use disorder (CUD+) on demographically-corrected T-scores for tests of attention/working memory, processing speed, executive functioning, verbal fluency, learning, memory, and motor ability.
Potential confounds were selected a priori based on the literature and analyzed for inclusion as covariates in primary analyses. These included demographic variables (e.g., age, gender; Goodkin et al., 2001; Heaton et al., 2011, 2015), the WRAT-3 (Fazeli et al., 2011; Heaton et al., 2015; Rivera Mindt et al., 2008), SES (Arentoft et al., 2015), antiretroviral drug classes (Jevtović et al., 2009), depression (Heaton et al., 2015; Rubin & Maki, 2019; Vance et al., 2007), comorbid alcohol/substance use (Heaton et al., 2015; Byrd et al., 2011), and HIV clinical characteristics (e.g., CD4 cell count, CD4 <200, CD4 nadir, viral load, viral suppression, HIV duration; Cysique et al., 2010; Heaton et al., 2010, 2015; Marcotte et al., 2003; Vance et al., 2007). Between-group t-tests and chi-square tests were conducted to identify differences between past CUD+ and CUD- groups across variables (see Table 2). If a variable differed between groups, then a t-test or correlation was conducted to determine whether it was also related to outcome variables. Variables that differed between groups and were related to outcome variables were included as covariates in primary analyses (p < .05). This procedure of empirically identifying and adjusting for confounders has been supported, as variables which only cause the predictor or outcome do not confound results and thus do not need to be included in analyses (West et al., 2014).
Ethnicity was added to all models because normative data across neurocognitive tests failed to account for ethnicity. Of note, ethnicity differed between groups and was related to several outcome variables (p’s < .05). Education was added to models if normative test data did not correct for education. Covariates added to the models are represented in Table 3. Statistical analyses were computed in IBM SPSS Version 25.
Results
Sample
Table 2 summarizes demographic and clinical characteristics of the sample (N = 138) and by CUD group (past CUD+ n = 47, past CUD- n = 91). The overall sample was middle-aged, high school educated, mostly male, and 71% Latinx. The past CUD+ group had significantly more Latinx participants than the past CUD- group (p < .05). Overall, 14% of the sample had a current CD4 <200/mm3, 39% had a detectable viral load (>50 copies/ml), and 25% were not virally suppressed (>200 copies/ml). On urine toxicology evaluations, 28% tested positive for cannabis. The sample had a mean Beck Depression Inventory-II Fast Screen (BDI-II FS) score of 3.28 (SD = 3.47; scores ≥4 indicate depression; Beck et al., 1996; Krefetz et al., 2004). Self-reported measures of mental and physical health symptoms did not differ between groups (p’s > .05).
Past CUD and Neurocognition
On average, all participants demonstrated intact neurocognition across domains. However, there were significant between-group differences, with small to medium effect sizes (see Table 3). One-way ANCOVAs revealed that past CUD+ PLWH outperformed past CUD- PLWH across all tests of processing speed. Specifically, past CUD+ PLWH performed significantly better on WAIS-III Digit Symbol-Coding (p = .036), and performed better at trend level on WAIS-III Symbol Search (p = .091) and Trail Making Test, Part A (p = .055). Past CUD+ PLWH also performed better on visual learning (BVMT-R total recall; p = .021) and memory (BVMT-R delayed recall; p = .009), and dominant hand motor ability (Grooved Pegboard; p = .047). There were no between-group differences for tests of verbal learning and memory and nondominant hand motor ability, or for any tests of attention/working memory, executive functioning, and verbal fluency (p’s > .10).
Discussion
Findings revealed that past cannabis use disorder (CUD+) was associated with better processing speed, visual learning and memory, and dominant hand motor ability compared to no past cannabis use disorder (CUD-) among primarily Latinx PLWH. There were no significant between-group differences for verbal learning/memory, nondominant hand motor ability, attention/working memory, executive functioning, and verbal fluency. Notably, past CUD+ PLWH had higher average T-scores across all tests, except verbal learning and memory and verbal fluency.
While current heavy/syndromic cannabis use may impair neurocognition in PLWH (Cristiani et al., 2004; Thames et al., 2017), this study suggests that past syndromic use does not, as past CUD+ PLWH performed similarly or better than CUD- PLWH across domains. Some studies have previously found no link between past cannabis use and neurocognitive impairment in PLWH (Basso & Bornstein, 2003; Chang et al., 2006; Gonzalez et al., 2011). Additionally, Lorkiewicz et al. (2018) found a negative effect of current (last 30 days) but not past cannabis dependence in PLWH. This may also imply a timeline of residual effects, consistent with research among heavy users, albeit mixed (Grant et al., 2003; Medina et al., 2007; Pope et al., 2001; Schreiner & Dunn, 2012). Given the negative link between current heavy/syndromic use and neurocognition, results may also suggest that cannabis-associated neurocognitive impairment resolves in PLWH who no longer endorse symptoms consistent with CUD, regardless of abstinence or continued non-syndromic use. Longitudinal research is needed to investigate this.
Interestingly, the largest effects (CUD+ better than CUD-) were within domains that are independently associated with neurocognitive dysfunction in current cannabis use (Broyd et al., 2016; Ganzer et al., 2016) and HIV (Heaton et al., 2010; Heaton et al., 2011). Though beyond the scope of this study, the abundance of cannabinoid receptors in hippocampal, prefrontal, and striatal regions, which are related to learning, memory, processing speed, and motor ability, may make these structures/functions more responsive to therapeutic effects of cannabis in PLWH and merits investigation.
Similar to Byrd et al. (2011) and Thames et al. (2016), this study suggests that past cannabis use does not impair and may even be related to better neurocognition under some conditions among PLWH. Future research should examine whether a causal effect exists, as this was beyond the scope of the study. Notably, our study differed from Byrd et. al (2011) and Thames et al. (2016) in domains implicated, as past CUD+ PLWH performed better on processing speed, visual learning and memory, and motor ability, but not verbal fluency. The reason for this is unclear, but could be related to bilingualism throughout the sample. Research indicates a bilingual disadvantage on verbal fluency measures (Gollan et al., 2002; Sandoval et al., 2010). While we covaried for ethnicity and used the best available normative data, we did not examine the relative contribution of bilingualism, which may partially explain the discrepancy.
Albeit mixed, growing evidence suggests potential neurobiological benefits of cannabis in HIV (Costiniuk & Jenabian, 2019). Cannabis may hinder HIV-infection and protect against disease progression and morbidity, as users show higher plasma CD4 and lower viral load than non-users. However, the neurocognitive impact has remained unclear. Extending prior research, this study suggests that past cannabis use does not impair and may even be related to better neurocognition in PLWH. Because disease progression and morbidity are strongly related to neurocognition (Chang et al., 2002), cannabis may be indirectly linked to better neurocognition via its effects on HIV-infection at the cellular level. Beneficial effects of cannabis on HIV symptoms and mood, which are linked to neurocognition, could also play a role. As mentioned above, negative effects of a current CUD may attenuate overtime with recovery, which could contribute to the findings. This cross-sectional study was not able to test these hypotheses regarding mechanisms by which cannabis impacts neurocognition. Future longitudinal research should investigate this.
Despite modest progress in cannabis, neurocognition, and HIV research, existing studies are limited by a profound underrepresentation of Latinx participants. Studies either do not include Latinx participants, fail to report ethnoracial characteristics, or include an unrepresentative sample. To our knowledge, this study is the first to extend this research to a well-characterized, primarily Latinx sample of PLWH. While cross-cultural replication is critical for many reasons (e.g., generalizability of findings, healthcare implications), this is particularly salient as Latinx are disproportionately burdened by both CUD and HIV compared to non-Hispanic whites (Chu & Selwyn, 2008; Estrada, 2005; Turner et al., 2000; Vaughan et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2016). Latinx PLWH have worse health (e.g., higher viral loads, higher mortality rate, shorter lifespan; Cargill & Stone, 2005; CDC, 2013; McGinnis et al., 2003; Morgello et al., 2002) and neurocognitive outcomes (e.g., global neurocognition, executive functioning, processing speed, learning, memory; Marquine et al., 2018; Rivera Mindt et al., 2008, 2014). It is critical to investigate the neurocognitive effects of cannabis in this population, as effects may be detrimental or therapeutic. Future research should focus on cross-cultural replication.
There are important limitations of this study. Past CUD+ PLWH may differ from other groups in ways that impact neurocognition. For example, some studies indicate that cannabis users, particularly heavy users, have an increased risk for depression with reduced recovery (Bahorik et al., 2017; Lev-Ran et al., 2013), which is important given the negative link between depression and neurocognition (Vance et al., 2007). In contrast, some research suggests that past users have lower rates of depression with abstinence (Jacobus et al., 2017). However, the current study did not require abstinence. Regardless, depressive symptoms did not differ between past CUD+ and CUD- groups and therefore do not explain between-group neurocognitive differences observed. This may even suggest that past CUD+ PLWH do not have more depressive symptoms than CUD- PLWH.
Additionally, albeit mixed, research suggests that past, heavy cannabis use is related to lower SES (Fazeli et al., 2011; Fergusson & Boden, 2008), which is related to poorer neurocognition (Arentoft et al., 2015; Sattler et al., 2012). In the current study, however, past CUD+ and CUD- groups did not differ in SES; therefore, SES is unlikely to account for the findings.
Polysubstance use history was not an exclusion criteria given high rates in PLWH. Although advantageous for external validity, this limits internal validity. While analyses were conducted to mitigate this, results should be interpreted in light of the complex histories of PLWH. Similarly, PLWH commonly have multiple comorbidities (e.g., Hepatitis C, cardiovascular disease) that may impact neurocognition but were not examined (Becker et al., 2009; Cherner et al., 2005). However, participants with significant non-HIV related medical/neurological comorbidities were excluded. Moreover, while participants with current CUD+ were excluded, those with a positive cannabis urine toxicology were not. PLWH report high rates of substance use, including those with a past substance use disorder. Thus, excluding these individuals would limit generalizability and ecological validity. Additionally, positive urine toxicology for cannabis was not related to any outcome variables. However, future research should examine self-reported current use, as the long half-life of cannabis on urine toxicology limits its utility as a measure of current use (Mariani et al., 2011). Last, because participants were primarily Caribbean Latinx, findings may not generalize to other subpopulations (e.g., Mexican/Mexican-American, Central American, South American); this should be further explored, along with the effects of bilingualism/multilingualism.
In conclusion, past CUD+ did not negatively impact neurocognition in a primarily Latinx sample of PLWH. Rather, findings indicated similar or better neurocognition in past CUD+ compared to CUD- PLWH. Nevertheless, this relationship remains exceedingly complex. Going forward, research should determine whether specific parameters of use modify this association (e.g., age of onset, dosage, recency, frequency). Future research should also address limitations detailed above; namely, clarifying independent and additive effects of polysubstance use and comorbidities, and extending this research to different Latinx subpopulations and other ethnoracial groups that are disproportionately affected by HIV, yet too often underrepresented in research.