Introduction
Cannabis use among older adults is becoming more common,1 and yet most studies examining cannabis use have ignored inclusion of older adults.2,3 Acute cognitive impairment has been observed during cannabis intoxication in attention, learning and memory, working memory, processing speed, and aspects of executive functioning,4,5 and long-term cannabis use is most often associated with poorer memory,6,7 but these findings are established in younger adults. Cognitive responses to cannabis use may vary based on life stage, as the development of the younger adult brain may be altered with cannabis use while older adults have completed development.8 Furthermore, older adult cannabis users may face issues related to medical conditions, pharmacokinetics, or polypharmacy that can impact cognition but are less relevant to younger populations.9,10
Gruber and colleagues examined the effects of cannabis use on cognition in a sample including older adult medical cannabis users, finding that 3 months of cannabis treatment led to improvements on measures of executive functioning as well as other measures of well-being.11,12 An additional study examined cognitive performance among older adults with chronic pain, grouping participants by those who had a medical cannabis license and used regularly for at least 1 year and those without a license.8 The researchers found no differences in cognitive performance between groups, though it is unclear to what extent those without a license had a history of cannabis use. These studies suggest that for older adults, relatively brief medical cannabis use may result in stabilized or improved cognitive performance through alleviating other factors impacting cognition (e.g., pain, sleep, mood), though the impacts of longer-term or recreational cannabis use on older adults’ cognition remain unclear. As medical and recreational users may differ in the strain and dosage of cannabis selected for use,13 clarifying impacts of cannabis use on cognition in aging is critical for informing older adults and their healthcare providers.
The current study extends findings from a pilot study on cannabis use among older adults.14 The previous study found no significant differences in overall cognitive functioning between user and nonuser groups, but did not examine important factors such as duration of use within the cannabis user group. The current analyses further explored cannabis use measures, cognitive performance on a brief computerized battery, and self-reported depression, anxiety, and emotion regulation. Based on existing literature, it was hypothesized that long-term cannabis use would be associated with poorer memory.
Methods
Participants
Full details of the larger pilot study are previously published.14 Online advertisements and direct mail flyers were used to recruit adults aged 60 years and older who were regular cannabis users (i.e., at least once per week for at least the last year), and nonusers (i.e., who reported no more than one remote lifetime use of cannabis). Exclusion criteria attempted to control for significant health concerns and factors confounding cannabis use and cognition, including history of antipsychotic medications or serious mental illness, uncontrolled diabetes and/or hypertension, >20 pack years of tobacco use, and any history of alcohol or other Substance Use Disorder (other than Cannabis Use Disorder). All study procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Colorado Boulder. The current analysis includes only those participants (n = 28 users and n = 10 nonusers) who completed cognitive testing during their study participation (i.e., n = 18 nonusers were drawn from a parent study and did not complete testing). All cannabis users agreed to abstain from use for a minimum of 6 hours prior to their appointment and reported doing so at the time of their appointment.
Measures
An initial phone screening interview with a research assistant recorded estimated years of regular cannabis use (i.e., ages or dates/years of regular use summed to a total) and participant height and weight to calculate body mass index (BMI). Participants completed basic questions about demographics, the Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test (AUDIT15), the Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II16), the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI17), and the Emotion Regulation Questionnaire (ERQ18). Participants also reported days of alcohol and cannabis use and amount used per day on the Timeline Follow-Back (TLFB19) for the 90 days prior to participation, along with preferred potency and method of consumption (e.g., edibles, smoked). Cannabis users also completed the Marijuana Dependence Scale (MDS20), and the extended Marijuana Motives Measure (MMM21), which assesses reasons for using cannabis. Items of the MMM form subscales for coping (e.g., “to forget about my problems”), enhancement (e.g., “because I like the feeling”), social (e.g., “because it makes social gatherings more fun”), conformity (e.g., “to fit in with the group I like”), expansion (e.g., “because it helps me to be more creative and original”), and routine (e.g., “out of habit”) reasons. Two additional text entry items were included for participants to report their own reasons if not already included.
The NIH Toolbox Cognition Battery22 includes 7 tests of attention (Flanker Inhibitory Control; FIC), episodic memory (Picture Sequence Memory; PSM), working memory (List Sorting Working Memory; LSWM), vocabulary knowledge (Picture Vocabulary; PV), oral reading skill (Oral Reading; OR), executive function (Dimensional Change Card Sort; DCCS), and processing speed (Pattern Comparison Processing Speed; PCPS). It is brief (30 minutes) and administered on a tablet. Primary measures were age-normed scores for each test and the age-normed Total Composite score. Standard scores have a mean of 100 and standard deviation of 15 points, such that scores falling between 90 and 85 are considered low average and scores below 85 are below average.
Statistical Analyses
All statistical analyses were conducted in SPSS Statistics Version 26 (IBM Corporation). Group demographic differences were examined using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s HSD post hoc comparisons, or independent samples t-tests for user group comparisons. Pearson’s r bivariate correlations were used to characterize overall relationships between cannabis use measures and cognitive test scores. General linear models (GLMs) were used to examine relative contributions of the main variable of interest (group) as well as covariates of age and TLFB days of cannabis use to variance in cognitive test scores.
Results
Group Characteristics
See Table 1 for sample characteristics. A bimodal distribution of years of cannabis use was observed, such that participants generally reported following 1 of 2 patterns: “long-term” users who had used regularly since initiating use in late adolescence or early adulthood (n = 15 reporting ≥ 19 years of use), and “short-term” regular users who first tried cannabis at a similar age but used inconsistently (e.g., discontinued use during middle adulthood while raising a family), and then initiated regular use later in life (e.g., following retirement or with legalization of recreational use; n = 13 reporting ≤ 7 years of use). Nonuser, short-term, and long-term groups did not differ in race/ethnicity, gender, BMI, years of education, or emotion regulation reappraisal and suppression, depression, anxiety, or alcohol use. However, groups were different in age [F(2,35) = 3.26, p = .05] such that nonusers were approximately 5.8 years older than long-term users, and age was therefore included as a covariate in GLMs.
Cannabis users overall reported less than 1 dependence symptom (M = 0.79, SD = 1.17). User groups did not differ in number of symptoms reported, although n = 3 short-term users and n = 4 long-term users could possibly meet criteria for mild (2–3 symptoms) to moderate (4 symptoms, n = 1 short-term user) Cannabis Use Disorder. Participants most frequently reported using cannabis for enhancement reasons, followed by expansion and social reasons, on the MMM. Participants generally reported a low level of coping, conformity, or routine reasons. Long-term users reported greater routine use [t(26) = –2.82, p = .01], but groups did not otherwise differ in their reasons for using cannabis. A total of 10 participants (n = 5 short-term users and n = 5 long-term users) additionally reported using cannabis for sleep and/or pain. Most users (57%) reported smoking, while 32% reported using edibles and 11% reported both smoking and consuming edibles. Only 25% of users were able to report the typical tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) content of strains they used (n = 3 reported 20% and n = 4 reported ≥ 25%), although one participant had grown the same strain on her property for 40 to 50 years (assumed 4% THC content23). For reference, at the time of the current study average THC content was 15% for legally available strains in Colorado.24 Long-term users reported a marginally (p = .06) greater number of use days in the past 90 days compared to short-term users. Given the potential confounding influence of recent differences in frequency of cannabis use on cognitive test scores, cannabis use days was also included as a covariate in GLMs.
Correlations among cannabis use measures and cognitive test scores are reported in Table 2. Estimated years of regular use and reported age of first use were not significantly correlated, but years of use and recent days of use was marginally correlated (i.e., long-term regular users were slightly more likely to be more frequent current users as well). Years of regular use was negatively associated with DCCS, PCPS, and Total Composite (r = –.64, –.49, –.55, respectively, all p < .01). Age of first cannabis use was positively associated with PV, ORR, and Total Composite (r = .44, .40, .44, respectively, all p < .05), such that older age of first trying cannabis was associated with better reading and vocabulary performance. Finally, greater frequency of past 90-day cannabis use was associated with worse LSWM performance (r = –.45, p < .02).
Variance in Cognitive Function
Accounting for age and recent days of cannabis use, groups were significantly different in performance on DCCS [F(2,33) = 5.60, p < .01], PCPS [F(2,33) = 3.65, p = .04], and Total Composite [F(2,33) = 5.43, p < .01; see Table 3]. Nonusers scored significantly higher than long-term users on DCCS (Tukey’s HSD = 15.17, p < .04, 95% CI 0.65–29.68). Short-term users scored significantly higher than long-term users on DCCS (Tukey’s HSD = 17.94, p < .01, 95% CI 4.47–31.42), PCPS (Tukey’s HSD = 18.99, p < .04, 95% CI 0.70–37.28), and Total Composite (Tukey’s HSD = 12.95, p < .01, 95% CI 3.35–22.56). Short-term users were not significantly different from nonusers. Long-term users performed in the low average range on FIC and PCPS tests, but otherwise all standard scores fell in the average to above average ranges.
Age accounted for approximately 13% of remaining variance in PV [F(1,33) = 4.88, p < .05], and 15% of remaining variance in PCPS [F(1,33) = 5.68, p < .05] scores, such that older age was associated with better vocabulary and worse processing speed. Finally, recent cannabis use days accounted for approximately 12% of remaining variance in LSWM performance [F(1,33) = 4.43, p < .05] beyond group and age, with greater recent frequency of use associated with worse working memory.
Discussion
The current findings suggest that rather than memory, lower processing speed and executive functioning are associated with long-term cannabis use among older adults who primarily use for recreational purposes, to the extent that total cognition score was also lower among long-term users compared to nonusers and short-term users. In the context of educational attainment at the college level and above average vocabulary, which is a common and validated estimate of premorbid cognitive function and tends to be resistant to change over time,25 long-term users performed in the low average range (i.e., nearly 2 standard deviations below expectation based on premorbid functioning estimate) on tasks of processing speed and inhibitory control. These findings are consistent with studies suggesting that psychomotor and executive functions are impaired in acute intoxication but reduced performance may persist in chronic users.26 In older adults, poor processing speed and executive functioning have been associated with worsened health outcomes such as lower physical exercise and increased frailty, difficulty completing instrumental activities of daily living, and risk for further cognitive decline.27–30
The well-documented relationships between older age, improved vocabulary, and slower processing speed were also present in these results.31 Despite the effects of age on processing speed, group difference in total cognition score also may suggest a more generalized influence or mild changes in daily functioning for lifetime users that was not accounted for by age. Interestingly, even among this group of older adult users, older age of first use (e.g., after adolescence) was associated with better vocabulary and oral reading performance, perhaps consistent with existing literature on neurodevelopmental vulnerability.32 Finally, recent frequency of cannabis use was associated with poorer working memory. This is consistent with previous research suggesting that recent cannabis use can impair working memory and lead to inefficient working memory processes in the brain (i.e., needing to rely on additional brain regions not typically used for working memory to complete tasks).33 For older adults, working memory is linked to several cognitive processes such as orientation, language and reading comprehension, and spatial processing.34 Worsened working memory may impact daily functioning through impairment or reduced functioning in one or more of these processes, as working memory functioning has been found to transfer to other cognitive domains.35
Although some differences were found in long-term users’ cognitive performance, across measures of depression, anxiety, emotion regulation, and alcohol use, participants did not differ by cannabis use group. Additionally, no significant differences were found between short-term users and nonusers across cognitive scores. In some cases, short-term users scored higher than nonusers though without statistical significance and in the context of slightly higher average premorbid functioning estimate. Although participants reported primarily recreational motivations for cannabis use, about a third of users reported pain or sleep concerns as one reason for their use. Previous literature has characterized this group as “dual motives users,” suggesting that they may be a unique subgroup using for both medical and recreational purposes.13 Based on previous literature suggesting that medical cannabis use may contribute to improvements in cognitive functioning by alleviating other symptoms, it is possible that short-term users in this study may have experienced some cognitive benefit or attenuation of health problems that negatively impact cognitive performance (e.g., obstructive sleep apnea36). Additionally, the absence of significantly different outcomes across groups on multiple domains could suggest that cannabis use, whether long or short-term, may have little effect on older adults’ cognitive performance outside of executive functioning and processing speed abilities, though the following limitations should be considered.
This exploratory study had a small sample size, and participants demonstrated a high to above average estimated level of premorbid cognitive functioning that may have attenuated impacts of cannabis use on other cognitive tests (e.g., memory) through reliance on cognitive reserve. Groups were slightly different in terms of age (i.e., older in the nonuser group than user groups), which may have impacted group analyses beyond inclusion of age as a covariate. The NIH Toolbox Cognition Battery was useful in this pilot study and is well-validated in terms of norms, but includes only a single test in each domain, and more comprehensive neuropsychological measures will be pursued in future studies. Further, the reliance on a tablet assessment battery could have impacted performance for older adult users whose comfort in using this technology may vary.37 The study requested that all participants refrain from consuming cannabis for at least 6 hours prior to study participation, but toxicology data were not collected, and it is impossible to rule out the potential influence of acute exposure on study results. Similarly, estimates of cannabis use were based on subjective memory. A relationship was found between greater reported cannabis use days and poorer working memory, though future studies should consider replicating these findings with prospective measurements of cannabis use if possible. Finally, age of first use in this study was collected as age of first ever trying cannabis, rather than age of first regular use. This is an important distinction for future studies to gather during data collection to better inform possible long-term impacts of cannabis use early in neurodevelopment.
Even given the above limitations, there are some important considerations for healthcare providers of older adults beyond possible associations between poorer cognitive function and long-term cannabis use. The study broadly recruited regular users (here defined as use at least once per week for at least the last year), but roughly half of those individuals had used regularly for decades. It is therefore critically important for providers to screen for duration of use rather than current use alone. Further, the majority of participants were unable to report the THC content of their typical products (e.g., because a child, friend, or partner regularly grew or purchased it for them). Older adults report wanting better communication with their providers and more information about cannabis use.38 Especially given much higher THC contents currently available compared to when older adults may have first used cannabis,23 and that greater acute cognitive impairments are associated with use of higher THC strains,39 older adults and their providers are encouraged to consider THC dosage as they would for any prescribed medications. Similarly, based on the lack of significant differences between short-term and nonusers, older adults and their providers may weigh the costs and benefits of initiating cannabis use in place of other pharmaceuticals with substantial addictive or side effect concerns. Overall, the current findings suggest that short-term recreational use does not result in differences in cognitive performance compared to nonusers, but greater frequency may be linked to lower working memory. Finally, in contrast to memory impacts observed in younger adults, longer duration of use may be linked to poorer processing speed and executive functioning in particular among primarily recreational older adult cannabis users.