Introduction
In recent decades, cannabis use changed worldwide, including legal status, increased potency (Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol [THC] concentration) (ElSohly et al., 2021; ElSohly et al., 2016), and methods of use (e. g., dabs, edibles, vaped flower) (Meacham et al., 2018), while high levels of use by adolescents and young adults remained relatively stable (Patrick et al., 2022; Schulenberg et al., 2018). There are over 120 cannabinoid constituents (ElSohly et al., 2017), with THC and cannabidiol (CBD) the best known and researched. THC acts as a partial agonist of the endocannabinoid system (ECS) binding to cannabinoid 1 (CB1) and CB2 receptors, while CBD is an allosteric modulator at the CB1 receptor indirectly affecting ECS activity (McPartland et al., 2015; Pertwee, 2008). Preliminary evidence suggests that THC in particular disrupts CB1 receptor signaling, which may in turn impact cognitive functioning (Mizrahi et al., 2017). Adolescence marks a critical period of neuroanatomical and cognitive development (Giedd et al., 2015; Gogtay et al., 2004; Shaw et al., 2008), including within the ECS system (Schneider, 2008), in which teenagers may be particularly vulnerable to exposure to exogenous cannabinoids. Yet there are conflicting findings regarding cognitive effects of repeated cannabis use in adolescents and young adults. Some authors argue that cannabis use has no impact on cognition beyond 72 hours after use (Scott et al., 2018), indicating the need for more fine-grained detail, such as objective measurement of cannabis exposure, to clarify the relationship between cannabis and cognition in the developing brain. Further, cannabis and cognition are limitedly studied in early adolescence.
Several preliminary studies of hair analyses for cannabinoid content reveal that cannabinoid analytes in hair may reveal unique and important relationships in cannabis-using adults. One suggests THC concentration in hair relates to cognitive and psychiatric functioning (Morgan et al., 2012). Another study found cannabinoid concentrations in hair corresponded to psychiatric symptoms, such as hallucinations in adults < 35 years-old (Nestoros et al., 2017). More recently, a study did not find cannabinoids in hair to significantly improve a predictive model of acute psychotic symptoms, despite significant correlations between symptoms and THC and CBD hair concentrations (Curran et al., 2019). Larger hippocampal volumes were found when THC and CBD were present in hair compared to THC alone (Demirakca et al., 2011; Yucel et al., 2016), perhaps because CBD may modulate THC metabolism (Greene et al., 2018).
Hair analyses detect THC, THC’s inactive metabolite (THCCOOH), and CBD in hair. Presence of each analyte can indicate cannabis use, though detection may vary for a variety of reasons. For example, parent analytes present in cannabis smoke (i.e., THC or CBD) typically have higher concentrations than metabolites, except in cases of oral ingestion (e.g., edibles) (Huestis et al., 2007). THCCOOH is also the definitive indicator of actual cannabis use rather than potential external contamination from cannabis smoke (Hill et al., 2016). If quantitative hair cannabinoid concentrations relate to cognitive performance, cannabinoid concentrations may explain some discrepancies in neurocognitive performance and other outcomes (Gonzalez et al., 2017; Lisdahl et al., 2014; Scott et al., 2018), suggesting cannabinoid analyte concentrations in hair may be better markers to assess the impact of cannabis than relying on self-report alone. Yet studies thus far are limited to adults who regularly use cannabis, despite the fact that youth may be more vulnerable to cannabis effects.
On balance, cannabinoid content from hair alone may not be enough to identify all youth who use cannabis, particularly during early adolescence (Wade et al., 2023). Moderate to frequent episodes of cannabis use are often needed for detection in hair (Huestis et al., 2007; Taylor et al., 2017), which is more frequent than most youth experimentation (Sullivan et al., 2022). Thus, combining hair cannabinoid results with self-reported cannabis use may be the most appropriate means of identifying all youth who use cannabis (Wade et al., 2023), optimizing power for detecting correlates of use.
Here, we investigate the presence of cannabinoids in hair and self-reported cannabis use in relation to neurocognitive performance in early adolescence. We leverage the large, diverse Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development (ABCD) Study, wherein around 10 % of participants (~1,200) have their hair assayed on an annual basis (Lisdahl et al., 2018; Wade et al., 2023; Wade et al., 2022), in addition to undergoing a full cognitive assessment every other year. We first combine self-reported cannabis use with objective hair toxicology from the Year 4 annual follow-up visit to identify adolescent cannabis users. We next match youth with cannabis use to non-using controls on sociodemographic characteristics and compare group performance on neurocognitive measures. Then, given the potential for dose-dependent relationships between cannabinoids and cognition, we explore whether THC, THCCOOH, and/or CBD concentrations and self-reported standard units of use relate to neurocognitive performance.
Materials and methods
Data were derived from the 21-site, longitudinal ABCD Study. Nearly 12,000 youth were initially enrolled at ages 9–10 years and are followed annually through adolescence. In data release 5.0 (June 2023; https://doi.org/10.15154/8873-zj65), 24,925 had hair samples, with 2,971 analyzed (approximately 90% of whom were at high risk of substance use; for details, see Wade et al., 2023; Wade et al., 2022). Of participants with hair analysis results at Year 4 follow-up (n = 601 out of 2,067 collected samples, ages 13–14 years), 123 were classified as youth with cannabis use (CU): 54 had cannabinoids present in hair, 32 self-reported cannabis use (at least a puff) in the past year, and 37 had cannabinoids present in hair and self-reported cannabis use in the past year. These 123 CU were matched with 123 non-using controls, for a total sample size of n = 246; all included participants were required to have neurocognitive data on at least one task. Data were collected between September 2020 and January 2022, and all participants completed at least part of their visit in person to provide a hair sample. Though longitudinal data from the ABCD cohort are available, repeat hair analysis data within the same participant are limited, precluding use of the same cannabis use identification methods; thus, analyses were limited to Year 4 follow-up. Participants and their parents/guardians provided written informed assent and consent. The UCSD Institutional Review Board approved all aspects of this study.
Participant matching.
Participants with cannabis use were matched on age, sex at birth, race/ethnicity, and socioeconomic factors (parental education and household income) to those with tested hair samples and no indication of cannabis use with the R package MatchIt (Ho et al., 2011). Matched control participants were required to have no indication of past-year cannabis use based on self-report, parent report, and hair results. Matches were fair based on relatively low standard mean difference (around or below 0.1 on each variable, with the largest variability in race/ethnicity variables) and empirical cumulative distribution functions close to 0 on all variables.
Measures
Sociodemographic and hair characteristics.
Parents reported youth sex at birth, household income, race, ethnicity, and highest parental education at baseline (Barch et al., 2018), and age was recorded at the time of hair collection. Siblings are enrolled in the ABCD Study, and 14 sibling pairs (n = 28 participants) were included in the present analyses; each participant has a family ID that is either unique if they do not have a sibling in the study or shared with their sibling, if they also participate in the ABCD Study. Youth who used cannabis (identified by hair or self-report) were matched to nonusers (denied cannabis use on self-report; no positive hair for any substances).
Self-Reported substance use.
After reminding participants of the confidential nature of their participation, trained research assistants queried each participant’s substance use in the past year or since last study visit (Lisdahl et al., 2018). Each drug class was individually reported. For the present analyses, a binary yes/no variable for self-reported use of any type of cannabis product was coded. Additionally, total past year cannabis was calculated from those who used more than one standard unit. Total number of doses in the past year combined standard units as defined in Lisdahl et al. (2018) across all cannabis products queried (smoked flower, vaped, edible, dabs, combined cannabis and alcohol products, oils, and synthetic cannabinoids), which translates use into quantifiable amounts for most products (0.5 mg for a standard unit of cannabis flower; 1 mL cannabis infused oils; 1 g synthetic cannabinoids) or, for some, number of use episodes (cannabis concentrates).
Hair sample Collection, Selection, and analysis.
All participants with hairstyles that would not be disrupted by hair collection were asked to allow trained research assistants to carefully collect 100 mg hair (typically in 3–4 small undetectable snips at the root from the crown of their head). Hair was packaged and stored for future analysis. Due to financial limitations restricting analysis to a subsample of participants, hair analysis was selected for youth (1) who reported past-year cannabis use, (2) with elevated likelihood of substance use, or (3) were in a pool of participants considered unlikely to initiate use were randomly selected (approximately 10%; details available in (Wade et al., 2023; Wade et al., 2022).
Hair was securely stored at room temperature and shipped to Psychemedics (Culver City, CA) for analysis, previously described in detail elsewhere (Hill et al., 2016; Wade et al., 2023). Hair underwent a thorough wash procedure to mitigate environmental exposure to cannabis through smoke containing THC or CBD (Hill et al., 2014; Hill et al., 2016); THCCOOH, as the primary metabolite of THC, indicates definitive evidence of personal cannabis use rather than environmental exposure. THCCOOH was screened by immunoassay prior to testing by LC-MS/MS regardless of screening results, while other cannabinoids were tested directly by GC–MS/MS without screening. Samples were tested to the limit of detection to maximize sensitivity (THCCOOH, LOD/LOQ = 0.02 pg/mg; THC and CBD = 5 pg/mg). Up to 1.5 in of hair closest to the scalp were tested, providing a window of cannabinoid detection of up to 3-months. Individuals with shorter hair length had shorter detection windows; in the present analysis set, the shortest samples for a few participants reflected a 1.5-month window of detection and several had between 2 and 3-months, and the rest (n = 239) had samples facilitating a 3-month window. Only 225 of the 601 participants with hair samples at Year 4 Follow-Up had multiple instances of hair testing, sometime between Baseline and Year 3; 67 of CU youth have multiple instances of hair testing across one or more of the four prior time points of data collection.
Neurocognition
Neurocognitive performance was measured using the NIH Toolbox (Luciana et al., 2018; Weintraub et al., 2013). Tasks were administered by trained research assistants on 3rd generation iPad Air devices (10.5in). Six tasks were administered: (1) Picture Sequence Memory Test (“Picture Memory”)—a measure of episodic memory where participants are shown a sequence of images, which they recall in order (n = 241); (2) Picture Vocabulary Test—a measure of receptive language and estimated IQ where participants hear a word and are asked which of four pictures match the definition of that word (n = 242); (3) List Sorting Working Memory Test (“List Sort”)—a measure of working memory where participants sort stimuli presented both audibly and visually from smallest to largest (n = 242); (4) Flanker Inhibitory Control and Attention Test (“Flanker”)—a measure of attention and inhibition where participants respond to a central target stimuli in the middle of a row of either congruent or distracting stimuli (n = 238); (5) Pattern Comparison Process Speed Test (“Pattern Comparison”)—a measure of processing speed where participants quickly indicate whether two images are identical on as many items as possible within 90 s (n = 238); (6) Oral Reading Test—a measure of academic achievement where participants are asked to correctly read aloud and pronounce words (n = 242). Given the expected relatively large performance improvements across the participant age range (ages 12–15), age-normed standard scores were used in the present analyses.
Statistical analysis
All data analyses were completed in R version 4.1.0 (R Core Team, 2021) via RStudio (RStudio Team, 2021) utilizing 4 Year follow-up data from the ABCD Study. Neurocognitive data were checked for outliers via the outliers package (Komsta, 2022) using the Grubbs test; there were no outliers. Participants with missing data in a cognitive domain were excluded from analyses on that task.
Primary analysis.
Nested ANCOVA models were run using lme4 (Bates et al., 2015). Random effects of unique family identification codes (i.e., family relationship) were included, as the sample includes some sibling pairs. Maximally complex models (nested ANCOVAs) were attempted for all tests (Barr et al., 2013), with cognitive performance predicted by group status and nested family relationships. In some instances (i.e., Picture Memory, Pattern Comparison), nested ANCOVA models experienced an error of singularity due to overfitting; in these cases, standard ANCOVAs (i.e., non-nested) were run with cognitive performance on each impacted task predicted by group status, and family relationships included as a first level covariate.
Follow-Up analysis.
To assess dose-dependent relationships between cannabinoid hair content (THCCOOH, THC and CBD) and past-year cannabis use with cognitive performance, Pearson correlations were run within the CU group only, including those with cannabinoids in hair and/or self-reported cannabis use (n = 123).
Results
Sociodemographics and cannabis use.
As participants were matched on sociodemographics, groups did not differ on these characteristics. Participants were, on average, 14.3 years old (12.8–15.8 years old; SD = 0.7 years) and balanced on sex (48% female). Within the CU group, past-year self-reported cannabis doses marginally correlated with THCCOOH concentration (r(121) = 0.22, p = .06; see Fig. 1). Full sociodemographic characteristics are presented in Table 1, and cannabis use characteristics are in Table 2.
Cannabis use group analysis of neurocognition.
The CU group scored significantly lower on Picture Memory (F (1,238) = 4.67, partial η2 = 0.02, p = .03) and marginally lower on Picture Vocabulary (b = −0.23, partial R2 = 0.01, 95 % CI[−0.48,0.02]), p = .07) than the Control group. The CU group scored nearly 5 points (or ~⅓ of a standard deviation) lower on the Picture Memory task than Controls, on average (see Fig. 2). Though cannabis use status at Baseline (ages 9–10) cannot be confirmed through the same methods (e.g., hair analysis), performance on these tasks did not differ by group at Baseline (descriptive data can be viewed in the Supplement).
Cannabinoid concentrations in hair and neurocognition.
Within the CU group, higher THCCOOH concentrations were significantly associated with lower Picture Vocabulary (r(118) = −0.20, p = .03; see Fig. 3a) and Flanker (r(115) = −0.19, p = .04; see Fig. 3b) performance. Picture Memory performance was marginally negatively correlated with THCCOOH (r(117) = −0.18, p = .05). No correlations with THC or CBD hair test results were evident.
Past-Year cannabis use and neurocognition.
Within the CU group, greater self-reported past-year cannabis use was significantly associated with lower Picture Memory (r(117) = −0.19, p = .04,) and List Sort (r(118) = −0.33, p = .0002) performance.
Discussion
Adolescent cannabis use and cognitive performance have previously been related (Infante et al., 2020; Jacobus et al., 2019; Jacobus et al., 2015; Lisdahl & Price, 2012; Lisdahl et al., 2014; Wade et al., 2020). However, cannabis products are changing in cannabinoid content, and the relationship between cannabis and cognition in younger adolescents is less characterized. Here we identified youth who used cannabis through hair toxicology and self-report (CU), comparing their cognitive performance on the NIH Toolbox to that of matched controls. In a cross-sectional comparison of sociodemographically-matched CU youth to controls, the CU group performed more poorly on an episodic memory task and, marginally, on a receptive language task. Follow-up correlation analyses indicate that higher THCCOOH concentrations were associated with poorer language and attention performance. Self-reported past-year cannabis doses were also associated with lower performance on episodic and working memory tasks. Together, relationships between neurocognition and cannabis use in young adolescents (average age = 14) were seen in select cognitive domains. Investigating cannabis-cognition relationships requires sensitive metrics to ensure accurate identification of cannabis use, and biosamples such as hair toxicology may help optimally accomplish this in youth.
The present results mirror other cross-sectional studies of youth who have and have not used cannabis, yet here we investigated younger youth and lighter use patterns than most prior work. Cannabis use was long associated with cognitive deficits (Lees et al., 2021; Lisdahl et al., 2014; Lorenzetti et al., 2020; Mashhoon et al., 2019), specifically in episodic memory (Duperrouzel et al., 2019; Lawn et al., 2022; Medina et al., 2007), working memory (Hanson et al., 2010), and attention (Jacobus et al., 2015; Wallace et al., 2019). Importantly, the CU group scored, on average, 5 points (1/3 SD) lower than the Control group on a test of episodic memory (Picture Memory), consistent with prior research on cannabis-cognition relationships which found a 1/3rd standard deviation difference in those who used cannabis (Scott et al., 2019). As a cross-sectional study, the present cognitive performance differences might predate cannabis use initiation. As hair toxicology results indicate under-reporting of cannabis use (Wade et al., 2023; Wade et al., 2022) and repeat hair testing is limited in the current ABCD data release, we were not able to establish a time prior to initiation. However, here Baseline cognitive performance did not differ between groups and previous work in this cohort suggests that cognition is not a significant predictor of cannabis onset in early adolescence (Miller et al., 2023). Admittedly, that study relied solely on self-report when grouping youth with cannabis use. Other studies find cognition changes longitudinally post-initiation of cannabis use (Ajmera et al., 2021; Infante et al., 2020; Meier et al., 2012). Alternatively, other shared confounds may contribute to both cannabis use and lower cognition or lower cognitive performance may precede and predict cannabis initiation (Meier et al., 2018; Pope et al., 2003). Some research suggests the NIH Toolbox may not be as sensitive for detecting substance use-cognition relationships (Meredith et al., 2020), thus, these findings may be particularly notable given potentially reduced measure sensitivity. As participants are still in early adolescence, it will be important to monitor these youth through adolescence to assess trajectories of use and cognition, given the potential for more pronounced neurocognitive differences with younger onset (Castellanos-Ryan et al., 2017; Jacobus et al., 2015), dose-dependent relationships based on frequency, recency, and amount used (Lees et al., 2021; Mashhoon et al., 2019) and recovery of function with abstinence (Hanson et al., 2010; Wallace et al., 2020). Further, characterizing potential mechanisms underlying these early neurocognitive differences is needed.
Consistent with prior work, toxicology data improved the assessment of brain-behavior relationships in youth who used cannabis through more accurate identification of cannabis use. Specifically, in the CU group, we found higher hair THCCOOH concentration correlated with poorer receptive language, attention, and inhibition, and, marginally, episodic memory. Consistent with the present findings, we previously found higher urinary THCCOOH content was related to poorer verbal memory in young adults (Wade et al., 2021). In other studies using hair toxicology, the focus was on THC and CBD, rather than the metabolite of THC, THCCOOH. One study measured THC and CBD concentrations in adults who regularly use cannabis, finding a high THC concentration group performed worse on verbal and episodic memory tasks than low-THC or CBD groups (Morgan et al., 2012). Results pertaining to hair THCCOOH concentrations may be because this analyte is detectable only with moderate to frequent cannabis use. Consistent with this, more self-reported past-year cannabis doses was linked to poorer performance in episodic and working memory, but hair THCCOOH was not. Differences between hair and self-reported use associations with cognition may be due to recency of use, as THCCOOH is not present in hair samples until about 8 days after last use, when cannabinoid analytes deposited in hair from the blood exit the scalp following hair growth. The unique strengths (for hair, objectivity; for self-report, detailed information on patterns of use) and limitations (for hair, lack of information on patterns of use; for self-report, potential misreporting) of hair and self-report may contribute to each having a unique relationship with cognitive outcomes. Importantly, THCCOOH, as a metabolite of THC, is a clear indicator of personal cannabis use (Cooper et al., 2012; Hill et al., 2016), whereas THC and CBD hair analytes can indicate environmental exposure including to second-hand smoke, or are more sensitive to limited personal cannabis use than THCCOOH (Huestis et al., 2007). Thus, brain-behavior relationships in cannabis use may require moderate use to be evident, with the greatest concern for those who use more frequently, even in younger adolescents. More research is needed to identify optimal measurement and classification of cannabis use (e.g., self-report vs. hair toxicology vs. both).
Limitations
Limitations to the present analyses include that hair was not collected from all participants due to remote assessments (especially during the pandemic), participant hairstyles that may be disrupted by collection, or participants declining. Not all collected hair was analyzed due to financial constraints (Wade et al., 2023; Wade et al., 2022), reducing sample size. As noted above, detecting cannabinoids in hair requires moderate to frequent use (Huestis et al., 2007; Taylor et al., 2017), and lighter use may go undetected, and youth themselves may deny use (Wade et al., 2023). Thus, the CU group reflects a range of cannabis use patterns and, as cannabis dose may impact brain-behavior relationships (Lees et al., 2021; Mashhoon et al., 2019), those with limited cannabis use (e.g., 55% of the CU group with minimal use) may be more similar to controls than those with moderate to heavy use, though this needs to be investigated further in the future. THCCOOH is the best indicator for confirming consumption of cannabis; here we used both THCCOOH and THC as hair was thoroughly washed to mitigate environmental contamination (Hill et al., 2016). The cognitive tasks here are limited to the NIH Toolbox, which may not be sensitive enough to detect some substance-cognition relationships (Meredith et al., 2020), though some cognitive relationships were still revealed. Though groups were matched on sociodemographic factors, other relevant factors (e.g., clinical mental health status) were not included in matching given the relatively limited matching pool. Analyses were cross-sectional and not corrected for multiple comparisons, and results need to be confirmed longitudinally.
Conclusions.
In conclusion, characterizing the relationship between cannabis use and cognition in early adolescence is key, as cannabis products are rapidly changing, and prevalence remains high. This study enhanced assessment methodology by combining objective hair cannabinoid concentration with self-reported cannabis history to identify cannabis and control group membership. Youth (mean age = 14 years) who used cannabis had 1/3 standard deviation lower performance on an episodic memory task than matched controls, on average. Cognitive performance across several domains was negatively correlated with higher THCCOOH concentrations and more past year use in youth with cannabis use, suggesting a dose-dependent relationship. Importantly, use of biosamples to measure cannabis were effective in assessing these relationships. Finally, given the young ages assessed here and relatively low levels of cannabis consumption reported, based on available findings, prevention efforts throughout adolescence should aim at delaying cannabis onset and restricting youth access to cannabis, especially highly potent THC products.
Supplementary Material