Introduction
Cannabis is the most widely used illicit substance globally1. Its legalization for medical and recreational purposes has been paralleled by increased usage rates in some countries (e.g., Australia2, the US3). Acute cannabis intoxication has been linked to a heightened risk of increased false reports4,5, which can pose major challenges for legal settings, especially when eyewitnesses are interviewed about a criminal event. Indeed, individuals who are high during the encoding of a crime and its subsequent retrieval are more likely to respond incorrectly to suggestive questions about a witnessed event than sober individuals4. This and other recent findings have led researchers to argue that cannabis-intoxicated eyewitnesses, sometimes referred to as ‘highwitnesses’6, “do not make good eyewitnesses”7. Given that cannabis-intoxicated individuals represent a substantial proportion of the witnesses encountered by law enforcement (e.g., in the US8,9), there is a pressing need for effective interview techniques tailored to this population. The current quasi-experimental study examined the effects of acute cannabis use on eyewitness memory performance using the ‘gold standard’ of eyewitness investigative interviewing - the Cognitive Interview10.
The link between cannabis use and compromised memory functioning has been well documented11,12. These impairments are primarily attributed to the primary active cannabinoid tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), which acts on the endocannabinoid system, particularly CB1 receptors in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex13- regions that are critical for memory encoding, consolidation, and retrieval. Here, THC disrupts neural communication by impairing synaptic plasticity and long-term potentiation, both of which are processes fundamental to memory formation and retrieval14. Additionally, cannabis-induced alterations in working memory, attention, and executive functioning further compromise an individual’s ability to accurately encode and retrieve events12. These cognitive deficits are exacerbated during acute intoxication but may also persist among sober chronic users15. A more detailed discussion of theoretical and cognitive mechanisms underlying these impairments can be found in Kloft et al.9.
In contrast, research specifically examining effects of acute intoxication on eyewitness memory is sparse, and only two such studies have included a measure of free recall16,17. In both studies, intoxicated participants and their sober16 or placebo-control counterparts17 were exposed to a mock crime (watched a video as part of a field study in coffeeshops16 versus witnessed staged event in the lab17, and were interviewed shortly after while still intoxicated. Memory reports from intoxicated participants were less complete than those from control participants, with fewer recalled details overall. Nevertheless, the accuracy of memory recall in these two studies did not statistically differ between intoxicated and control witnesses, suggesting that while cannabis intoxication may reduce the quantity of information recalled, it may not necessarily increase recall of incorrect details.
Finding that acute cannabis intoxication leaves accuracy intact seems at odds with research demonstrating that cannabis consumption increased the susceptibility to false memory formation (fabricated or distorted recollections of events4. Acute cannabis use has been linked to increased false responding on basic memory recall and recognition tests18–21, tests of spontaneous false memory4,5,22, and tests of suggestion-induced memory in eyewitnesses and perpetrators using the misinformation method4. A crucial methodological aspect in this body of research is that the predominant format to elicit false memory effects consisted of forced-choice questions (e.g., yes-no questions such as “Do you recognize the word table from the previously learnt list?”22), instructing participants to guess even when uncertain. Taken together, the findings imply that cannabis might acutely cause a yes-saying response bias when individuals are uncertain of the accuracy of their memory but must still offer a response4.
Importantly, the effects of cannabis on memory can extend beyond acute intoxication. For example, regular cannabis users, even when sober, showed increased false recognition in paradigms such as the Deese/Roediger-McDermott (DRM) task23,24, where participants falsely remember non-presented, related words22 (see also4,25,26). This finding indicates that even individuals who are not under acute cannabis influence may exhibit elevated false memory levels compared to non-users, potentially due to residual or long-term cannabis effects.
In addition to whether an individual is a cannabis user (i.e., user status), the timing of intoxication – in other words, the memory phase during which cannabis intoxication is present – plays a crucial role in the effects that cannabis will exert on memory. Studies using the DRM paradigm showed that individuals exhibited reduced true memory rates (i.e., increased forgetting of true experiences) when participants were intoxicated during encoding but sober at retrieval, and higher false memory rates when cannabis was given just before retrieval5,27,28. Thus, the experimental disentanglement of drug effects on the distinct memory phases (i.e., isolating drug effects on encoding or retrieval) is essential28,29, an issue that studies in drug and applied memory research often fail to consider. The realization that cannabis intoxication can differentially affect memory phases has practical relevance because police officers have reported to regularly encounter intoxicated witnesses at different stages of the investigative process: when experiencing the event (encoding), during the police interview (retrieval), or both8.
Police officers might also ask cannabis-using eyewitnesses to make an identification decision from a lineup. Past research on the effects of cannabis on eyewitness identification and face recognition has yielded mixed results. While earlier studies detected no effect of acute cannabis intoxication on lineup identification accuracy16,17, a recent online study showed that cannabis acutely reduced memory discrimination accuracy and affected the confidence-accuracy relationship in a face identification task7. A methodological difference might account for these divergent findings: While the two former studies16,17 used an applied mock witness paradigm with one identification decision, the latter study7 was a face recognition experiment with 48 trials (yes/no) at recognition, making the latter task more sensitive to detect cannabis-induced effects. Furthermore, user status and lineup identification accuracy were not related in a recent study with chronic cannabis users and non-users26. This result suggests that acute intoxication rather than user status may be a better predictor of identification performance.
The current study
It is currently unclear how acute cannabis intoxication affects eyewitness memory recall when using evidence-based interview protocols such as the Cognitive Interview30. The Cognitive Interview is an empirically informed method for retrieving information from witnesses, comprising several mnemonic components and retrieval support strategies10,31 including the Mental Reinstatement of Context technique. Mental Reinstatement of Context (MRC) was devised to encourage witnesses to mentally re-create the psychological and physical encoding environment towards facilitating the feature overlap between the to-be-remembered event and the retrieval environment32. Contextual information (i.e., spatial, temporal, context and cognitive details) encoded alongside the target information is important for triggering and scaffolding conscious remembering of personally experienced events33–35 and can significantly improve witness memory33,36–38.
The beneficial effect of MRC within a Cognitive Interview in supporting memory retrieval is well established33,39. However, its effectiveness can vary as the required instructions are numerous and cognitively demanding, exceeding the cognitive capacity of many eyewitnesses (e.g., children, older adults, neurodivergent individuals). For cannabis-intoxicated witnesses, a Cognitive Interview incorporating MRC may be particularly challenging due to intoxication-related cognitive impairments, such as impaired working memory40,41. MRC requires witnesses to mentally reconstruct sensory, spatial, and emotional features of an event while holding and integrating these details in mind42–45. This process taxes working memory because it involves maintaining multiple contextual representations simultaneously, shifting attention between them, and binding them into a coherent scene while inhibiting competing information. Such functions are disrupted during cannabis intoxication: THC has been shown to impair both the maintenance and manipulation of information in working memory and to reduce inhibitory control, leading to increased mind-wandering and intrusion of irrelevant information11,12,41,46. Such impairments would likely undermine the sustained, effortful reconstruction that Mental Reinstatement of Context demands, and intoxicated witnesses may struggle to follow or benefit from the multi-step instructions that this mnemonic entails.
An alternative to traditional Mental Reinstatement of Context is Sketch-Reinstatement of Context, designed for use within the Cognitive Interview42. Witnesses are instructed to draw a sketch (i.e., detailed representation) of what happened while recalling the event, allowing them to self-generate salient retrieval cues. Sketch Reinstatement of Context (Sketch-RC) has proven an effective retrieval support technique for populations who struggle with MRC, such as children, older adults, and neurodivergent witnesses39,42,47–49. A Cognitive Interview that includes the Sketch-RC technique henceforth the Sketch-CI, is less cognitively demanding, quicker to administer, and minimizes the risk of incompatible or suggestive interviewer-initiated retrieval cues, compared to the traditional method42. Importantly, the Sketch-CI has been found to increase recall of correct event information recalled without a concomitant increase in errors, and thus to improve accuracy, making it a promising alternative to a traditional Cognitive Interview that includes the MRC technique42,47–49.
This study tested the effects of cannabis user status and acute cannabis intoxication at different timepoints on eyewitness recall performance when using the Sketch-CI. We aimed to elucidate (1) how cannabis use affects eyewitness memory recall when the Sketch-CI is used, (2) differences in memory recall between sober and intoxicated cannabis users, (3) whether the timing of intoxication (at encoding and subsequent retrieval versus at retrieval only) affects memory recall of intoxicated witnesses on the Sketch-CI, and (4) the extent to which cannabis affects lineup performance when the target is absent. For reasons of practical feasibility, we did not include a condition in which participants were intoxicated at encoding but sober at retrieval, as this would have required a design with multiple sessions and a substantial delay in between them28.
Participants were divided into four cannabis conditions: intoxicated at encoding and retrieval, intoxicated at retrieval only, sober cannabis users, and controls. All participants viewed a mock crime, were interviewed with the Sketch-CI, and completed three target-absent (TA) lineups. Given the increased yes-saying bias in memory tasks during both acute cannabis intoxication and sobriety4, the ability of cannabis users to correctly reject a target-absent lineup was of particular interest.
Our preregistered hypotheses (https://osf.io/x2abj) were as follows: (1) Given the general memory-impairing effects of acute and regular cannabis use11, we expected that the non-users would outperform the other three cannabis-using groups on completeness and accuracy. Prior work shows that cannabis users exhibit higher false memory rates than non-users22,25, which can affect accuracy. (2) Given the effects of cannabis on false memories, we expected that all cannabis-using groups would have higher levels of confabulation (i.e., mentioning a detail or event that was not present or did not happen) and recall more inaccurate details (i.e., recalling a detail incorrectly, for example recalling that the perpetrator wore a brown instead of a black coat), compared to the non-users. (3) Given the effects of acute cannabis intoxication on false memories at retrieval4,5, we expected that intoxicated users would report more confabulations and recall more inaccurate details, compared to sober users. (4) Given the effects of cannabis on encoding (i.e., increased forgetting)27,50, we expected that cannabis users high during both encoding and retrieval would be less complete than users who are high during retrieval only. (5) With regard to eyewitness identification, we expected that all three cannabis-using groups would have lower rates of correctly rejecting the lineup. H5 was based on findings of cannabis inducing a more liberal response bias in sober and intoxicated users4. The study by Rosen et al.26 had not been published at the point of hypothesis development.
Methods
Study design
We used a between-subjects design including four cannabis conditions, with the following factors: cannabis user status (user versus non-user), intoxication status (intoxicated versus sober; only applies to cannabis-using participants), and timing of the intoxication (intoxicated during encoding and retrieval versus intoxicated during retrieval only; only applies to intoxicated, cannabis-using participants). The cannabis conditions are referred to as High 1 group (intoxicated during both encoding and retrieval), High 2 group (intoxicated during retrieval only), Sober cannabis group (regularly using cannabis but sober during the study), and Control (non-users). Condition labels reflect the order in which intoxication occurred during the experiment, with the group intoxicated earlier labeled High 1 and the group intoxicated later labeled High 2. For ethical reasons, the variables intoxication status and timing of intoxication could not be varied within non-users.
Participants
Our minimum sample size was N = 128 (n = 32 per condition) based on an a priori power analysis using G*Power51 for a one-way ANOVA (fixed effects, omnibus) with an anticipated effect size (Cohen’s f = 0.3), an alpha of 0.05, and power set to 80%. The estimate of this effect size was based on a previous cannabis study with occasional cannabis users4, where the observed effect size for the difference in suggestion-based false memories for an eyewitness scenario between an acute intoxication condition and a placebo condition was Cohen’s d = 0.6 (this corresponds to a value of Cohen’s f = 0.3).
We tested 137 participants in total. We excluded three participants due to not complying with study rules (e.g., watching the crime video on a phone rather than a laptop), or not fulfilling the inclusion criteria (e.g., being high at baseline). We excluded three more participants due to inaccurate execution of the Sketch-CI (e.g., not mentioning the ground rules; these observations were however retained in the lineup analyses, consisting of two controls, aged 24 and 29 and female, and one High 2, aged 21 and male). The final sample included N = 131. Table 1 shows an overview of the sample characteristics. Recruitment targeted individuals from the Netherlands, Belgium, and Germany. However, due to the study being online, participants from other countries also enrolled.
Inclusion criteria for all groups were: 18–40 years of age, no consumption of alcohol on the day of testing, and good vision (with corrections, self-reported). Condition-specific inclusion criteria for the High 1 group were: regular use of cannabis (minimum 1/month), and intention to consume a cannabis product during the experiment. Inclusion criteria for the High 2 group were: regular use of cannabis (minimum 1/month), no use of cannabis on the day of testing, intention to consume a cannabis product during the study but not before, and being willing to do so after participating in the first part of the experiment. Inclusion criteria for the sober cannabis group were: no use of cannabis on the day of testing, regular use of cannabis (minimum 1/month), and no intention to consume a cannabis product during and before the experiment. Lastly, inclusion criteria for the control group were: no use of cannabis in the past 24 h and a lifetime cannabis use of maximum 10 occasions.
Table 2 shows an overview of the history and patterns of cannabis use of the three cannabis-using groups. In addition, most (92%) cannabis users reported using joints (i.e., cannabis cigarettes) as their general smoking method, followed by vapes (4%), pipes (1%) and other methods (1%; 2% missing values). The High 1 group disclosed having consumed a mean of 0.34 g (SD = 0.20; range 0.10–1.00 g) within the last hour. High 2 participants indicated having consumed an average of 0.28 g (SD = 0.13; Range: 0.10–0.70 g; 6% missing values). High 2 and Sober participants were asked to appear sober but were queried about the time of their last use: the majority (57%) reported using cannabis the last time on the day before testing (27% 2–7 days ago, 11% > 7 days ago; 5% missing values).
Across all groups, 17% of participants revealed having been diagnosed with a psychiatric disorder, and 10% reported being under the influence of medication, including Ritalin (1), Tentin (1), antidepressants (5), analgesics (1), monoclonal antibodies (1), antihistamines (1), and hormones (1; n = 2 preferred not to say). The inclusion of these participants in the sample was intended to maintain the diversity and representativeness of the population of cannabis users. To assess their potential influence as confounding factors, the analyses were performed both with and without these cases.
Table 1Participant characteristics for all cannabis conditions and inferential statistics across four conditions.Demographic variablesHigh 1(n = 32)High 2(n = 31)Sober cannabis(n = 32)Control(n = 36) p Age in years (mean, SD)23.53 (3.61)23.45 (2.64)24.19 (4.53)23.97 (4.04).8421Sex (#)<.0012Male1821104Female14102232Native language (#).7583Dutch78710German1010109English2653Other1371014Level of educationa (#).1903No degree0010High school17141210Bachelor’s degree9141617Master’s degree5218Phd1011Otherb0110Lifetime diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder (#).0963Never diagnosed30232232ADHD/ADD0120Autism0002Mood disorder0212Anxiety disorder0110PTSD1100Otherc1350Prefer not to say0110Medication use (#).0503Present1463Prefer not to say0110aLevel of education was measured in terms of highest level of education completed.bOther refers to higher professional education (Dutch: HBO), secondary vocational education (Dutch: MBO), or not specified (missing).cOther includes multiple diagnoses.1Based on ANOVA.2Based on Pearson’s chi-square test.3Based on Likelihood ratio test.
Participant characteristics for all cannabis conditions and inferential statistics across four conditions.
aLevel of education was measured in terms of highest level of education completed.
bOther refers to higher professional education (Dutch: HBO), secondary vocational education (Dutch: MBO), or not specified (missing).
cOther includes multiple diagnoses.
1Based on ANOVA.
2Based on Pearson’s chi-square test.
3Based on Likelihood ratio test.
Table 2History and patterns of cannabis use for the three cannabis-using conditions, mean (SD).High 1(n = 32)High 2(n = 31)Sober cannabis(n = 32) p Age of first use17.09 (2.81)16.48 (1.67)16.61 (2.53).5661Age of regular use19.94 (3.04)19.34 (2.30)19.58 (3.22).7091Frequency/week5.41 (3.65)4.49 (2.63)3.63 (3.91).1281Frequency/month22.53 (15.73)19.32 (10.52)17.48 (26.51).5611Grams used/week3.45 (3.85)2.81 (3.02)1.79 (1.90).0981Grams used/month14.53 (15.92)11.54 (12.53)8.66 (11.78).2451Last time use (h)NA80.86 (263.26)145.70 (205.78).4521Average amount of cannabis per joint (g)0.31 (0.21)0.35 (0.19)0.46 (0.90).5341Cannabis per joint (%)51.26 (27.28)56.21 (25.27)52.59 (28.58).7751Self-rated light versus heavy user (%)31/6939/6163/37.03221Based on ANOVA.2Based on Pearson’s chi-square test.
History and patterns of cannabis use for the three cannabis-using conditions, mean (SD).
1Based on ANOVA.
2Based on Pearson’s chi-square test.
Materials
All materials except for the video stimuli and lineups can be found on the Open Science Framework: https://osf.io/nsk8g/. We cannot share those materials because we do not have the involved people’s permission to share.
Questionnaires
During the experiment, all groups answered demographic and health questions (biological sex, age, native language, highest completed level of education, eyesight, lifetime diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder, current use of medication), and questions about other drug use (frequency per month, e.g., alcohol, MDMA etc.). The three cannabis using groups also answered questions about their general patterns of cannabis use (age of first use, age of regular use, tendency to use cannabis/hashish, usual method of consumption, frequency of use per week/month, grams used per week/month, grams per joint, percentage cannabis/tobacco per joint, and a binary rating whether they consider themselves a heavy vs. light user; derived from Kloft et al.22). Additionally, both the Sober and the High 2 groups were asked when the last time was that they consumed cannabis, and both the High 1 and High 2 groups received questions about their use on the day of testing (type of strain they used, method of smoking, and dose (in grams) used on the day of testing). Finally, the High 1 group was asked what dose (in grams) they used in the last hour.
All participants indicated their confidence and ease in completing the Sketch-CI on 5-point Likert scales (seven items). Specifically, they answered questions about the overall ease of recalling the events, of communicating when they did not know an answer, the interviewer’s friendliness, and the usefulness of drawing for memory recall. Participants rated their confidence on a 5-point Likert scale (1 = not at all confident or 0%/5 = completely confident or 100%) in overall memory performance, accuracy, and error-free reporting. Additionally, they were asked about previous eyewitness experiences and any instances of intoxication in such contexts.
Subjective high
Participants indicated at four different times on a Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) ranging from 0 to 100 how much they felt to be under the influence of cannabis at this moment in time.
Mock crime video
Participants viewed one of two short videos depicting a theft involving two perpetrators. The videos were presented without sound to make them accessible to participants of any language background. The videos showed two individuals planning to steal items from a parked car, with one committing the actual theft and the other distracting the car owner. In one version, the male perpetrator carried out the theft, and in the other, the female did, with all other details remaining unchanged. These films were created for a separate research project about multiple perpetrators [blinded for review]. The versions were randomized automatically by Qualtrics. The video with the male thief lasted 1 min and 38 s (1:38.36), and the version with the female thief was of similar duration (1:37.38).
Sketch Cognitive Interview (Sketch-CI)
After participants watched the mock crime video, they were tested on their memory with the Sketch-CI (based on Dando et al.36,47,49). The interview consisted of six phases. In the first phase (Explain), the interviewer introduced themselves and explained the procedure to the interviewee. In the second phase (Establish Rapport), the interviewer interacted with the participant using both verbal and non-verbal attentive behaviors (e.g., nodding when participants spoke/answered questions, making eye contact, smiling, being attentive, etc.), with the purpose of establishing trust and making participants feel comfortable. In the third phase (Sketch Reinstatement of Context), first four important ground rules were established: (1) report everything, (2) do not guess, (3) say if you do not know, and lastly, (4) say what you do not understand.
The participant was asked to draw about what they saw in the mock crime video, with an explanation that sketching might help them remember. Specifically, participants were instructed to draw whatever detail reminded them about the video in their preferred order, and were reassured it did not matter what and how they drew. Furthermore, they were asked to explain out loud what they were drawing. Participants were allowed as much time as needed to complete this task. When the participant had finished the drawing, the interviewer asked whether they would like to add something. In the fourth phase (Free Recall), the interviewee was instructed to verbally report everything they recalled about the mock crime video. They were encouraged to use their sketch as a tool to support their recall.
The interviewer did not interrupt and took notes of each of the broad themes mentioned in the same order they were described by the participant, followed by five seconds of silence for additional recall. Then, the fifth phase (Questioning) started with repeating the ground rules. Subsequently, the participant was asked more detailed questions about each of the topics mentioned before during Free Recall, in the same order that they had been mentioned. For each topic, one Tell Explain Describe (TED) probing question was used (e.g., “You talked about a building, please tell me more about it”). The last phase (Closure) concluded the interview with thanking the participant and addressing any questions they had.
The interviews were conducted by four trained researchers who completed a Tier I Sketch Cognitive Interview workshop held by the third author of this paper, an experienced CI researcher and practitioner. The five-hour training covered the theoretical background and guidelines of the Sketch-CI, as well as hands-on practice of the procedure. The practice was video-recorded and feedback was provided to each interviewer as part of the training.
The training was held in English, which was a second language for all four interviewers (two German, one Dutch, and one Filipino native speaker). To support recruitment and accommodate the most common native languages in the region, participants were offered the choice to complete the interview in Dutch, German, or English. Interviewers translated the original English interview script into their respective native language. A verbatim, word-for-word translation approach was not used, as the Cognitive Interview does not require exact verbal repetition of instructions. 29% of participants were ultimately interviewed in their native language [range per group 19–39%, with no significant group differences, χ²(3, N = 131) = 5.83, p =.12].
Lineups
Participants were asked to identify the female perpetrator, the male perpetrator, and the (male) victim from the mock crime video from three separate lineups, each containing six neutral-expression faces shown simultaneously. The two perpetrator lineups also had side profiles. All three lineups were target-absent, so six foils were shown, along with a seventh option labeled ‘not present’. The effective lineup size Tredoux’s E52 were 3.6, 4.7, and 3.7, respectively. After each lineup, participants rated their confidence in their lineup decision on an 11-point scale from 0% (not confident) to 100% (very confident).
Procedure
The current study was approved by the Ethics Review Committee of the Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience of Maastricht University (260_136_11_2022). All methods were performed in accordance with the Code of Ethics for Research in the Social and Behavioural Sciences Involving Human Participants (2018). Interested individuals could scan a QR code that led them to an online information letter and screening questions to check study eligibility (age, frequency of cannabis consumption). Only eligible participants were able to sign up by selecting their preferred experimental group, indicating their availability for a Zoom call, and selecting their preferred interview language (English, Dutch, German). Participants were then contacted to confirm the appointment and were sent a Zoom link and group-specific instructions (e.g., no alcohol and/or other substances the day of testing, instructions to prepare their cannabis product).
Participants were welcomed and thanked at the start of the call. The interviewer introduced themselves, explained the study procedure, and answered any questions (Phase 1 of Sketch-CI). After signing informed consent, the rapport-building phase began, followed by completing the baseline VAS (VAS-0). We began with the explanation and rapport phases to provide a clear overview of the study and to build trust with participants before presenting the mock crime video, as some participants would later consume cannabis during the session. Participants in the High 1 group then smoked their cannabis product. All participants watched the mock crime video and completed the VAS (VAS-1) again. A 9-minute filler task of copying simple drawings followed. Participants in the High 2 group performed the task for four minutes before consuming their cannabis product. Audio recordings began with participants restating their consent to be recorded, followed by the remaining CI phases. Post-interview, participants completed the VAS (VAS-2) and questionnaires on demographics, previous eyewitness experiences, and cannabis use history. Following another 20-minute filler-task, participants viewed the three lineups, followed by a final VAS (VAS-3). This delay was included to mitigate a verbal overshadowing effect (i.e., the reduction in identification accuracy after verbally describing a person53,54. Finally, participants were debriefed and reimbursed in the form of a 7.50€ bol.com/Amazon voucher. The entire experiment lasted between 42 and 82 min (M = 56, SD = 7.2), with length of the interview lasting on average 13 min (SD = 4.3, ranging from 7 to 35 min).
Recruitment took place online via various social media platforms (i.e., Instagram, WhatsApp, Facebook, Reddit, etc.) and offline through advertisement flyers that were put up in Maastricht University buildings, supermarkets, and local coffee shops in the Maastricht city center. Participant recruitment and data collection was carried out between March-June 2023.
Data processing and analyses
All interviews were transcribed using voice-to-text transcription softwares “Amberscript”, “OtterAI” or “Sonix”). Each transcript was manually checked and corrected for misheard or missing words before coding. Transcripts were then scored using a scoring template technique47,55. We first compiled a comprehensive list of all visible details for the two video versions (video 1: n = 146; video 2: n = 149). The transcripts were coded for correct details, incorrect details, and confabulations. Information was viewed as correct when the participant mentioned details that could be verified via the video. Details were coded as incorrect when the mentioned information was present, but factually untrue (i.e., reporting that the perpetrator had blonde hair instead of brown) and classified as a confabulation when the detail was either not present or did not occur (e.g., mentioning that the victim was wearing glasses when he was in fact not).
Initially, 5 transcripts were randomly selected and coded by all coders together for practice. Subsequently, 21 (16%) of the transcripts were randomly selected to conduct a two-way mixed effects Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC) for agreement between four research raters for correct details, incorrect details and confabulations. This percentage was chosen based on past studies, in which 15–20% were coded by all coders for reliability calculations42,56–58. Using a 95% confidence interval (CI), mean estimates showed excellent inter-rater reliability for (i) correct details, ICC = 0.97 (95% CI: 0.94–0.99), (ii) incorrect details, ICC = 0.94 (95% CI: 0.89–0.97), and (iii) good interrater reliability for confabulations, ICC = 0.83 (95% CI: 0.67–0.92). Coders were not fully blind to condition because interview files were stored with identifiers including the experimental group; however, these identifiers were not visible during the actual coding process, and scoring followed a standardized protocol to minimize potential bias.
Following coding, the dependent variables were calculated. Accuracy was computed by taking the ratio of correct details and all details mentioned. Completeness was computed by taking the ratio of all details mentioned versus all details that could have been mentioned according to the scoring template.
The equivalence of the groups was tested to ensure that observed differences could be attributed to the experimental conditions rather than pre-existing differences between the groups (not preregistered). For this, comparative analyses on key demographic variables were performed for all groups: analysis of variance for age, Pearson’s chi-square test for sex, and Fisher’s exact test for native language, level of education, lifetime diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder and medication use. Moreover, comparative analyses on variables of cannabis use history were performed for the three cannabis using groups, using analyses of variance for continuous variables and a Pearson’s chi-square test for categorical variables. Statistically significant variables were included as covariates in general linear model analyses.
Our preregistered analyses (https://osf.io/x2abj) included the following: to test hypotheses 1–4, a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted for each of the dependent variables (i.e., number of correct details, number of incorrect details, number of confabulations, completeness and accuracy), with cannabis condition as a between-subject factor with four levels. An alpha level of 0.05 was used to determine the significance of the results. If the p-value obtained by the ANOVA was less than 0.05, thus yielding a significant result, a Bonferroni post-hoc correction was conducted to identify statistically significant group differences. The effect size was estimated by calculating ω2.
To analyze the lineup data and test hypothesis 5, a combination of chi-square analyses (pre-registered) and Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE, preregistered only for testing the confidence-accuracy relationship) were used. GEE is well suited in designs with more than one lineup decision for each participant, allowing us to combine the analyses of all three lineup outcomes. GEE enables the specification of a regression model with dichotomous outcome measures and any combination of within- and between-subjects factors as predictors, with the specification of a so-called working correlation matrix (i.e., unstructured) as a nuisance parameter to accommodate the correlated residuals that result from repeated measurements59. The Wald Chi-Square Test is commonly used in GEE to assess the significance of predictors in the model.
The assumptions underlying the analyses of variance were checked. In case of violations of the chi-square test assumption of expected cell counts, the Likelihood Ratio chi-square (G²) was reported. Normality was checked by visual inspection of Q-Q plots and by examination of the Shapiro-Wilk test. Equality of variances was checked by examination of the Levene’s test. Violations of normality were detected for number of incorrect details and confabulations, and accuracy. According to the Central Limit Theorem, a sample size of n ~ > 30 is sufficient to assume normality in the larger population. Nonetheless, we conducted the analyses using the non-parametric alternative (Kruskal-Wallis test). Use of this test did not change the results; therefore we report the parametric analyses.
Results
All data and analyses are available at https://osf.io/nsk8g/.
Equivalence of cannabis conditions
When comparing all four groups on sociodemographic characteristics (see Table 1),
groups did not statistically significantly differ on the variables age, level of education, native language, and diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder. However, groups statistically significantly differed with regard to sex distribution due to an uneven distribution of males and females in the groups, with generally more males in High 1 and High 2, and more females in the Sober and control groups. Analyses comparing the three cannabis-using groups on variables related to cannabis use history (see Table 2) showed no statistically significant differences between the three groups, except for the factor of self-reported light and heavy cannabis use. Here, the majority of High 1 participants (69%) rated themselves as heavy users, while most Sober participants (63%) classified themselves as light users. Other drug use was compared between all groups (Supplementary Information, Table S1) and showed no statistically significant group differences, except for hallucinogen use, which was highest in the Sober group.
All variables found to statistically differ between groups were separately included as a covariate in a multivariate general linear model analysis, with all five dependent variables from the Sketch-CI and cannabis condition as a fixed factor (not preregistered). None of the variables showed a statistically significant association with the dependent variables (DVs), so no further analyses were conducted.
Subjective high
Subjective high (VAS) was measured at four time points during the study. Figure 1 illustrates the development of subjective high over time throughout the experiment. There were statistically significant group differences for all of the VAS scales (all ps < 0.001, Ω2 ranging from 0.36 to 0.90), validating that the group-specific instructions had the intended effect with the High 1 group feeling intoxicated as they watched the mock crime video, and High 2 participants feeling intoxicated as they completed the Sketch-CI but not as they viewed the video.
Fig. 1Subjective high visual analogue scale (VAS) mean ratings over course of experiment. VAS 0 Subjective high measured before administering the film stimulus (baseline), VAS 1 Subjective high measured after administering the film stimulus, VAS 2 Subjective high measured after administering the Sketch Cognitive Interview, VAS 3 Subjective high measured after administering the lineups. Error bars represent 95% CIs.
Subjective high visual analogue scale (VAS) mean ratings over course of experiment. VAS 0 Subjective high measured before administering the film stimulus (baseline), VAS 1 Subjective high measured after administering the film stimulus, VAS 2 Subjective high measured after administering the Sketch Cognitive Interview, VAS 3 Subjective high measured after administering the lineups. Error bars represent 95% CIs.
Sketch cognitive interview memory performance
Preregistered analyses
Figure 2 A displays the distribution plots for all Sketch-CI dependent variables by cannabis condition, while Table 3 displays these numerically. Frequentist analyses revealed no statistically significant effects of cannabis condition on memory performance. Groups did not statistically differ in the number of correct details, number of incorrect details, confabulations, recall accuracy, or recall completeness (all ps > 0.22, see Table S2 in Supplementary Information for memory performance scores and inferential statistics). Analyses were repeated with all those excluded who indicated presence of a psychiatric diagnosis or current use of medication (21%), which did not change the pattern of results. Accordingly, hypotheses 1–4 were not supported.
Table 3Comparisons of memory performance measures between the cannabis conditions, mean (SD).Cannabis conditionsHigh 1 group(n = 32)High 2 group(n = 31)Sober cannabis group(n = 32)Control group(n = 36)F p Ω2Number correct details36.28 (9.13)38.1 (9.30)41.53 (10.87)38.92 (11.94)1.400.2460.01Number incorrect details3.75 (2.93)3.74 (2.37)3.88 (1.72)3.17 (2.17)0.640.5890.00Number confabulations1.72 (1.60)1.45 (1.12)1.22 (1.04)1.17 (0.87)1.510.2150.01Accuracy (%)0.87 (0.06)0.88 (0.05)0.89 (0.06)0.90 (0.06)1.400.2470.01Completeness (%)0.28 (0.06)0.29 (0.08)0.31 (0.07)0.29 (0.08)1.120.3430.00F-values based on one-way ANOVA
Comparisons of memory performance measures between the cannabis conditions, mean (SD).
F-values based on one-way ANOVA
Exploratory analyses
Because the preregistered analyses did not detect any statistically significant group differences, we conducted complementary Bayesian ANOVAs to quantify the evidence for the null hypothesis. These analyses were performed in JASP (version 0.19.1) using the software’s default priors (r scale = 0.5) and compared models including cannabis condition to the null model. These results provided moderate to strong evidence in favor of the null model across all measures of recall performance (BF₀₁ range = 4.33–11.64), indicating that the data were several times more likely under a model assuming no group differences than under models including cannabis condition. Building on these results, we explored the role of several variables of interest, including associations with subjective high, dose, and subjective ratings of interview performance (reported below), as well as the type of cannabis user (heavy versus light versus non-user), and interview phase (Sketch, Free recall, Questioning; see Supplementary Information).
Fig. 2Raincloud plots A Sketch Cognitive Interview memory performance and B lineup measures. *p <.05, pairwise comparisons. Error bars represent 95% CIs.
Raincloud plots A Sketch Cognitive Interview memory performance and B lineup measures. *p <.05, pairwise comparisons. Error bars represent 95% CIs.
Subjective high and dose. We tested whether subjective intoxication ratings immediately after the Sketch-CI (VAS2) and the self-reported dose (in grams) were associated with memory performance in High 1 and High 2 participants. Table 4 displays the correlation matrix, both by group and for the two intoxicated groups combined.
In the High 1 group, higher subjective intoxication was associated with fewer correct details and decreased recall completeness (r (30) = − 0.57 and r (30) = − 0.51, respectively). In contrast, a higher feeling of intoxication was linked to lower accuracy in High 2 participants (r (29) = − 0.41). When the two groups were collapsed, these correlations decreased in magnitude (r (61) = − 0.34 for correct details, − 0.33 for accuracy, and − 0.26 for completeness) but remained statistically significant.
For the dose used, no significant correlations were detected when considering the High 1 and 2 groups separately. However, when combined, a higher dose was modestly related to more confabulations (r (58) = 0.27) and lower accuracy (r (58) = − 0.27). Dose was not significantly related to subjective high post-interview (all ps > 0.30). After Bonferroni correction (α = 0.05/6 = 0.008), only the correlation between VAS2 and total correct details recalled in the High 1 group remained statistically significant.
Table 4Correlation matrix between subjective high post-interview (VAS2) and the dependent variables of the Sketch Cognitive Interview.Total correctTotal incorrectTotal confabulationsAccuracyCompletenessVAS2 (High 1)− 0.57***− 0.010.03− 0.29− 0.51**VAS2 (High 2)− 0.160.250.12− 0.41*− 0.07VAS2 (Overall)a− 0.34**0.120.07− 0.33**− 0.26*Dose used (High 1)− 0.060.020.35− 0.23⪪0.01Dose used (High 2)0.110.310.06− 0.330.17Dose used (Overall)b− 0.010.110.27*− 0.27*0.06*p <.05, **p <.01, ***p <.001.aBased on n = 63.bBased on n = 60.
Correlation matrix between subjective high post-interview (VAS2) and the dependent variables of the Sketch Cognitive Interview.
*p <.05, **p <.01, ***p <.001.
aBased on n = 63.
bBased on n = 60.
Effect of cannabis condition on subjective evaluation of interview performance. We also conducted seven chi-square tests of independence to examine the association between cannabis condition and the variables probing subjective evaluation of the interview, measured with 5-point Likert scales. The association became significant for confidence in memory performance (measured with the statement “I am confident that I remember a lot of what I saw”), χ2 (9, N = 131) = 20.14, p =.017, Cramer’s V = 0.21, and for the overall ease of remembering the events, χ2 (9, N = 131) = 29.09, p <.001, Cramer’s V = 0.28. This indicates that the distribution of these variables varied across the groups. When inspecting the observed counts and the adjusted standardized residuals for these variables, it became clear that the associations were mainly driven by High 1 group participants rating themselves as less confident in their memory, and rating the ease of remembering events as more difficult, compared to the other groups. Cells with standardized residuals greater than ± 1.96 were considered to have significant differences between the observed and expected frequencies. For example, few High 1 participants were 100% confident in their memory performance (n = 1, adjusted residual = −2.0), while more reported they were only 25% confident (n = 5, adjusted residual = 2.0). Similarly, few High 1 participants found remembering the video events extremely easy (n = 1, adjusted residual = −2.0), while many found it somewhat difficult (n = 14, adjusted residual = 4.3). The other variables did not statistically significantly differ as a function of cannabis condition, χ2 ≤ 19.513, ps ≥ 0.077, Cramer’s Vs ≤ 0.22. The full results from these analyses can be retrieved from the OSF while a sample-wide analysis is provided in the Supplementary Information.
Lineup tasks
Preregistered analyses
Effect of cannabis condition on identification performance in target-absent lineups. Figure 2B depicts the distribution plots of lineup performance variables by cannabis condition. We conducted three separate chi-square tests to assess the association between cannabis condition and identification accuracy (i.e., correct rejections) for each of the three targets. None of the tests became significant, χ2 ≤ 3.093, ps ≥ 0.378, Cramer’s Vs ≤ 0.15, indicating that identification performance for target-absent lineups did not differ as a function of cannabis condition.
For all analyses in this section, the pattern of results remained the same when we excluded n = 6 participants who were exposed to some experimental error or distraction (e.g., failure to repeat ground rules) and also when we excluded another n = 28 participants who reported psychiatric or medical conditions.
Effect of cannabis condition on post-decision confidence ratings for accurate and inaccurate decisions in target-absent lineups. For accurate lineup decisions (i.e., rejections), post-decision confidence ratings did not differ as a function of cannabis condition, Wald χ2 (3) = 1.695, p =.638. For inaccurate lineup decisions (i.e., wrongful selections), post-decision confidence statistically differed as a function of cannabis condition, Wald χ2 (3) = 7.884, p =.048. Pairwise comparisons showed that the High 1 participants were on average significantly more confident in their inaccurate lineup decision (M = 60.93%, SD = 22.7) than both sober participants (M = 47.73%, SD = 20.2), p =.012, and control participants (M = 49.41%, SD = 22.8), p =.014. High 2 participants (M = 52.50%, SD = 27.5) did not differ significantly from any of the other groups, ps ≥ 0.116.
Exploratory analyses
We used GEE to test the effect of cannabis condition on identification accuracy. Analogous to the chi-square tests, the effect of cannabis condition on identification performance was not significant, Wald χ2 (3) = 3.410, p =.333. Additionally, we explored two-tailed non-parametric correlations between subjective high after the lineup tasks and consumed dose and overall lineup accuracy in intoxicated participants. A small negative correlation emerged between consumed dose and lineup accuracy, indicating that higher doses were associated with fewer correct identifications, ρ(58) = –0.28, p =.029. Subjective intoxication after the lineup was not significantly related to lineup accuracy, ρ(61) = –0.10, p =.451.
Discussion
The present study tested an evidence-based interviewing approach with cannabis-using eyewitnesses. We aimed to shift the focus from the deficits of this population to possible support tools exploring how we might obtain valid and reliable information from vulnerable groups such as cannabis users. Participants were either intoxicated at both encoding and retrieval (High 1), intoxicated at retrieval only (High 2), sober cannabis users, or controls. This design allowed us to examine the effects of cannabis on memory recall and identification performance across different stages of the memory process. All participants viewed a mock crime video before completing the Sketch Cognitive Interview (Sketch-CI) and three target-absent lineup tasks. Contrary to our hypotheses, we found no statistically significant differences in recall performance between the groups during the Sketch-CI. However, exploratory analyses revealed a link between subjective high and dose, suggesting that higher levels of perceived intoxication and cannabis dosage were correlated with poorer recall performance (lower accuracy, lower completeness, and more confabulations). This finding highlights a potential dose-dependent effect on recall performance that may not be captured in a group comparison. Additionally, while lineup identification accuracy for target-absent lineups did not differ significantly between groups, participants intoxicated during both encoding and retrieval (High 1) exhibited significantly higher confidence in inaccurate lineup decisions compared to sober cannabis users and controls. This result suggests that acute cannabis intoxication may inflate confidence in incorrect judgments.
Contrary to prior findings indicating the memory-impairing effects of acute and chronic cannabis use4,11,16,25, all cannabis conditions exhibited relatively similar recall performance in the Sketch-CI. Bayesian analyses supported these null findings, strengthening the conclusion that, under the present conditions, there was no meaningful evidence for cannabis-related differences in Sketch-CI recall performance. A possible explanation for our findings is that the Sketch-CI provides sufficient external retrieval support to mitigate some cannabis-related impairments. However, this interpretation should be considered tentative, as the study did not include a control interview condition (e.g., using the traditional Cognitive Interview that includes the MRC technique rather than sketching to cue episodic retrieval mode, or an interview without retrieval support). Other context reinstatement methods might be equally or even more effective for intoxicated individuals. Nevertheless, the Sketch-CI’s design—being less cognitively demanding and quicker to administer—may make it a practical tool when interviewing witnesses under the influence. Indeed, the sketching technique used here has recently been integrated into best practice guidance in England and Wales as a suitable technique for use when interviewing vulnerable witness/victim populations for whom the MRC is known to be inappropriate60.
While no previous studies have tested evidence-based interviewing methods with cannabis-intoxicated eyewitnesses, related research has shown that shorter versions of the Cognitive Interview improved recall accuracy and completeness for both sober and alcohol-intoxicated witnesses (moderate and severe levels) compared to structured control interviews61. Moreover, cannabis has previously been found to spare context reinstatement effects on memory6. The conditions for memory recall in our study were also favorable. Participants had a clear view of the mock crime video and a short retention interval between encoding and retrieval, meaning their memory of the event was still highly recent. Combined with the structured retrieval support provided by the Sketch-CI, these conditions may have minimized group differences. It is also noteworthy that High 1 participants reported greater difficulties with remembering the events and rated themselves as less confident in their memory completeness, but this was not reflected in a statistically significant decrease in interview performance. This underscores once more that appropriate retrieval support might mitigate cannabis-induced impairment to some extent.
Interestingly, we did detect some acute cannabis effects: Higher levels of subjective intoxication immediately after the Sketch-CI were associated with poorer recall performance, including reduced recall accuracy, completeness, and recall of fewer correct details (rs between − 0.26 and − 0.34). Analyzing the two intoxicated groups separately revealed stronger, more nuanced relationships: for High 1 participants, subjective intoxication correlated with decreased recall of correct details (r = −.57) and reduced memory completeness (r = −.51), while for High 2 participants, subjective intoxication was associated with lower recall accuracy (r = −.41). Although our design had the limitation that in High 1 participants, cannabis was active during both encoding and retrieval, these findings align with previous research suggesting that cannabis intoxication at encoding can increase forgetting, while intoxication at retrieval may reduce accuracy and increase error rates5,27. For cannabis dose, no significant correlations with memory performance emerged when analyzing the groups separately. However, pooling the two intoxicated groups revealed a moderate positive correlation between higher doses and confabulations (r =.27) and a negative correlation with accuracy (r = −.27). Since these correlations were less robust and smaller in magnitude compared to the results for subjective intoxication, it may be possible that how intoxicated an individual feels matters more than the actual consumed dose in terms of memory recall impairment. This is consistent with findings from the alcohol and cognition literature, where perceived intoxication often correlates more strongly with performance impairment than actual blood alcohol concentration62. Moreover, in cannabis and driving research, cannabis-induced reduction in driving confidence was related to reduced ability on a driving simulator63, indicating that intoxication may still preserve some insight into one’s impairment. Additionally, these findings may also be partially accounted for by participants having consumed different cannabis strains with varying potencies. Individual factors, such as cannabis usage habits, tolerance, and the frequency of use, all affect how a person responds to a given dose. Subjective intoxication could serve as a more representative indicator for the magnitude of acute cognitive impairment, because it allows for a quick assessment of an individual’s current state, independent of their drug use history or specific dose consumed.
In terms of eyewitness identification, there were no statistically significant effects of cannabis condition on accuracy in the three target-absent lineup tasks. However, as shown in Fig. 2B, participants in the High 1 group demonstrated a tendency to be less accurate in their lineup decisions compared to the other three groups. Notably, this group exhibited inflated confidence in their inaccurate lineup decisions. Specifically, High 1 participants were significantly more confident in their incorrect selections of an innocent filler, compared to sober cannabis users and controls. Additionally, within the intoxicated participants, higher consumed dose was modestly associated with poorer lineup accuracy (ρ = −0.28), suggesting a small dose-related decline in identification performance that was not apparent at the group level. This pattern indicates that acute intoxication during both encoding and retrieval may influence how reliably participants make lineup decisions, with the more pronounced effect emerging in their confidence rather than in their accuracy per se (although again, perhaps the four-group design lacked sensitivity). The increased confidence in incorrect lineup selections partially aligns with an earlier study that showed that participants intoxicated with cannabis exhibited poorer confidence-accuracy calibration than sober participants7. Interestingly, we did not observe inflated confidence in our High 2 group who were intoxicated only at retrieval. This finding suggests that forming memories for faces while sober might to some degree protect against overconfidence, even when the lineup decision is made while intoxicated. The contrast between these two groups indicates that cannabis intoxication at the encoding phase may specifically impair the ability to assess the accuracy of one’s memory at retrieval, leading to greater confidence in incorrect memories. These findings warrant further investigation of the impact of cannabis on identification accuracy and the confidence-accuracy relationship.
Implications, limitations and future directions
The study has several limitations. Our findings suggest that the Sketch-CI may be a useful interviewing tool for cannabis-intoxicated eyewitnesses, potentially helping to mitigate some of the cognitive impairments typically associated with intoxication. However, without a baseline comparison of different interview types, it is not possible to conclude that the Sketch-CI is more effective than other interviewing methods. Given the general lack of standardized procedural regulations for handling intoxicated witnesses8,64, it is essential to adhere to evidence-based best practices, such as the PEACE model. This model underpins interviewing methods like the Sketch-CI, emphasizing information gathering, rapport-building, strategic questioning, and minimizing coercion65. Such approaches are particularly beneficial for protecting vulnerable individuals, including those intoxicated. Forced choice questions were previously found to result in higher false responses in cannabis users, especially those acutely intoxicated, so using best practices is of particular importance in this population. Finding that being under acute influence while viewing a crime increased confidence in incorrect identification decisions further warrants caution when asking cannabis-using individuals to identify someone from a lineup.
Furthermore, the study benefited from a diverse and representative sample of cannabis users drawn from the general population. On the other hand, a diverse sample may have come with larger variability in cannabis effects due to individual differences in tolerance and subjective responses, which may have masked some between-group differences. Similarly, cannabis-using participants self-selected their experimental condition, likely skewing those who would feel most comfortable with being interviewed while high towards the two acute intoxication conditions. The study’s quasi-experimental field setup inherently involves higher levels of experimental noise compared to controlled laboratory studies. This noise—arising from variability in participants’ environments and behaviors—makes it harder to detect the underlying signal and may necessitate larger sample sizes to achieve adequate statistical power. While we conducted a priori power analyses to determine the sample size, such analyses may underestimate the need for upscaling in naturalistic field studies, where increased variability can dilute effect sizes66. Nevertheless, studies such as the current one are difficult to run and come with a trade-off, balancing power with practical feasibility. Finally, the absence of an interview control condition further limits the ability to directly compare the effectiveness of the Sketch-CI to other interviewing methods.
Future studies could aim to replicate and extend the current findings by conducting placebo-controlled drug administration trials in a laboratory setting, where the cannabis dose is kept constant. Such studies could include a control interview condition, such as one without retrieval support (e.g., no mental reinstatement of context), to provide a direct comparison with the Sketch-CI. Although difficult and resource-intensive, we also call for a move towards studies using designs that isolate the effects of intoxication on encoding, consolidation, and retrieval29(for an example see67. A second step could involve disentangling the contributions of the sketching and rapport-building components, as both of these factors may have substantially contributed to the relatively comparable memory performance observed across groups. A body of literature suggests that rapport-building enhances recall by increasing memory completeness and accuracy68,69. Rapport is believed to relieve social demands during interviews, which in turn boosts cognitive capacity for recall68,70,71. Participants in our study frequently expressed positive feelings about the interview process (e.g., “It feels like I made a new friend”, “I had fun doing this”), and 99% rated their interviewer as friendly (see Supplementary Information). This suggests that rapport-building was successfully implemented. On the other hand, the sketching phase itself warrants further investigation: in our sample, most correct details were recalled during the sketch phase (see SI), and research has shown that sketching while speaking leads to reporting more details than when participants only provide verbal reports72. Finally, exploring subjective intoxication as a marker of real-world impairment would be of high applied value, helping to bridge the gap between laboratory findings and real-world conditions.
Conclusion
This study indicates that evidence-based interviewing methods such as the Sketch Cognitive Interview may be beneficial for interviewing cannabis-using eyewitnesses. By fostering a comfortable environment using mnemonic structures, the Sketch-CI may support memory recall and facilitate the sharing of accurate information, even among witnesses under the influence. However, the negative impact of subjective intoxication levels on recall accuracy, completeness, and meta-memory raises important questions about how cannabis affects the validity of eyewitness testimony. This factor may be more meaningful in differentiating between credible and non-credible eyewitnesses. Future studies should focus on elucidating the conditions under which cannabis-using witnesses can provide valid testimony, and whether they can benefit from the ‘gold standard’ of police interviewing, namely the Cognitive Interview or one of its adaptations. Understanding these conditions is crucial for developing best practices to handle intoxicated individuals within the legal system and ensuring the integrity of eyewitness testimony in legal proceedings.
Supplementary Information
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
Supplementary Material 1