Introduction
Alcohol is the leading cause of preventable death among young adults worldwide, with 283 million individuals globally meeting criteria for an alcohol use disorder (1). Acute alcohol intoxication is believed to impair a range of cognitive and motor functions, resulting in various adverse behavioral consequences including risky decision making (2–4), impaired driving (5,6), and aggressive behaviors (7–9). Alcohol is further believed to have neurobiological effects that induce altered affective states, such as dampening of stress responses, which can reinforce drinking behavior and ultimately result in the development of addiction (10–12). To better inform interventions for addiction, and also elucidate mechanisms underlying alcohol’s behavioral effects, an understanding of alcohol’s impact on neural circuits is critical (13–15).
One tool for capturing alcohol’s neural effects that has long been favored by addiction scientists is the measurement of event-related potentials (ERPs), derived from the electroencephalogram (EEG). Different from other brain imaging methods that infer neural activation from hemodynamic activity and are thus subject to confounds from the vasoactive properties of alcohol (e.g., fMRI; 16–19), EEG methods directly measure the extracellular voltage fields produced by neurons in the brain, which propagate through the skull and scalp to the recording electrodes. ERPs comprise segments of the EEG that are temporally yoked to stimuli in the environment and/or the participant’s own behaviors (20). Reproducible features of the ERP (“components”) have been well-characterized and linked to functionally and anatomically distinct brain networks and processes, capturing not only sensory and motor processing, but also cognitive and emotion-related functions, some relatively automatic and others requiring attentional control (21).
Scientists have long recognized the powerful potential of paradigms combining randomized laboratory alcohol-administration methods and ERP measurement techniques (22–24). Although researchers have employed ERP methods to capture alcohol’s effects across a range of components and processing domains, a subset of ERP components have emerged as particularly relevant for understanding alcohol-related behavioral impairment and susceptibility to addiction (see Table 1). Alcohol’s effects on controlled neural processing have been probed using ERP components linked to attention and decision-making (P3b) as well as components linked with performance monitoring and the detection of errors (Error-Related Negativity/ERN; Feedback-Related Negativity/FRN). In the realm of automatic processing, researchers have assessed alcohol’s impact on the Mismatch Negativity (MMN), which indexes pre-attentive detection of deviant environmental stimuli and is linked to involuntary attention shifting, as relevant for various complex behaviors including driving (22). Other components of interest to researchers have included those involved in conflict monitoring/controlled inhibition (N2b) and the classification of stimuli (N2c).
In a 2002 report published in the journal Science, Ridderinkhof and colleagues employed ERP measures to examine the impact of high and low dose alcohol on processes involved in performance monitoring among 14 participants (25). Results of this study challenged traditional conceptualizations of alcohol as a “dirty drug” with broad CNS-depressant effects across neural systems (26–28), indicating instead that alcohol’s tendency to impair brain function may be targeted to specific circuits rather than diffuse across processing domains. Of note, both prior and also subsequent to this report, multiple studies have leveraged the combination of alcohol-administration and ERP methods, assessing alcohol’s effects on the ERP components targeted by Ridderinkhof and colleagues as well as those linked with a range of other functions, with results often revealing a similar mixture of significant and null effects (23,24,29–32). Although such patterns might have important implications not only for the understanding of alcohol but also for our knowledge of neural systems more broadly, the power of any single study to inform conclusions is limited, especially as they depend for their full value on the interpretation of null findings, and sample sizes in this literature have been inadequate for detecting small effects. To our knowledge, to date there has not been a quantitative synthesis of research exploring acute alcohol effects in humans using any brain imaging modality. Here we present the first meta-analysis to examine the acute effects of alcohol on the human brain. Specifically, leveraging the power afforded by combined samples, we synthesize results of laboratory studies examining the impact of alcohol consumption on ERP component amplitudes across alcohol doses and processing domains.
Methods and Materials
The databases PubMed, PsycArticles, and ProQuest Dissertations and Theses (a gray literature database) were searched for articles published prior to May 2020. The following search terms were used: (“alcohol” OR “ethanol”) AND (“ERP” OR “event-related potential” OR “P3” OR “P300” OR “N2” OR “N200” OR “MMN” OR “mismatch negativity” OR “ERN” OR “error-related negativity” OR “FRN” OR “feedback-related negativity”) AND (“alcohol administration” OR “dose” OR “acute effects” OR “laboratory”). Bibliographies of studies meeting inclusion were scanned for additional eligible studies. In total, 3,969 records were screened for inclusion (see Figure 1). Systematic review and meta-analytic procedures employed PRISMA guidelines and followed a pre-registered data analytic plan (https://osf.io/p4ds6/).
Studies were required to meet the following eligibility criteria: 1) Involve empirical research featuring random assignment of human participants to alcohol and no-alcohol condition(s). If assignment to beverage condition was within-participants, the order of sessions was required to be counterbalanced to avoid the confounding of dosing and practice effects; 2) Assess the amplitude of at least one of the following ERP components: Error-Related Negativity (ERN)/Feedback-Related Negativity (FRN), Mismatch Negativity (MMN), N2b (anterior N2 responses, encompassing both novelty and control paradigms), N2c (posterior N2 responses, from simple RT and oddball paradigms), or P3b (see Table 1). These components were chosen as those with functional relevance for understanding alcohol’s effects that also had good representation and reasonably standardized operationalizations in the available literature, encompassing processing stages ranging from stimulus presentation to response, including both early (i.e., automatic) and late-stage (i.e., controlled) processing; 3) Report available in English language; 4) Involve at least one ERP assessment during acute alcohol intoxication.
All eligible studies were coded by two independent raters for the following characteristics: 1) Sample size; 2) Alcohol dose, coded as the peak blood alcohol concentration (BAC) for alcohol condition(s) (see supplemental Methods for details of dose coding); 3) Component type: ERN/FRN, MMN, N2b, N2c, P3b. Categorization of the N2 followed the general approach outlined in Folstein and Van Petten (33) but combined novelty and control paradigms in the N2b. Given that links have been posited between the ERN and FRN (34)—see Gehring et al. (35) for discussion of an alternative viewpoint—and that the FRN alone was not well-represented in this literature, we combined these into a single category (although see eTable 1 for analyses parsing these components). For more details of component operationalization, see eMethods; 4) ERP task name/type; 5) Mean participant age; 5) Gender (%male); 6) Study Risk of bias, assessed using the revised Cochrane risk-of-bias tool for randomized trials (36); 7) Effect size. Effect sizes were calculated as Hedges’ g (37), with a negative effect size representing lower ERP amplitudes in alcohol vs. no-alcohol condition. In the event that insufficient information was available for effect size calculations within reports, authors were contacted. For the subset of effect sizes for which we were unable to compute a precise effect via information provided within the report, and authors were unable to provide this information, we approximated an effect using procedures outlined by Lipsey and Wilson (38,39) aimed at producing conservative effect size estimates and used these estimates in sensitivity analyses (see eMethods in the supplement for details of effect size approximation and also author contacts). Interrater agreement ranged from 72%−93%, with an average agreement of 85%. Disagreements were resolved by discussion.
Statistical Analysis
We employed 3-level random-effects meta-regression models accounting for non-independence of effect sizes within samples (40–42). Studies included in this meta-analysis often produced several effect sizes, examining multiple alcohol doses and also assessing more than one ERP component type within the same participant sample, and this 3-level meta-analytic framework enabled us to leverage the power of these within-sample contrasts and assess moderators that varied at not only the between-sample but also the within-sample level. The significance of Level 2 (σ2L2; within sample) and Level 3 (σ2L3; between sample) variance parameters were assessed using log-likelihood tests comparing models with and without these variance components. As the significance of such tests is impacted by the number of samples/observations, we also calculated I2 values representing the proportion of total variance captured at each level. Primary analyses were conducted incorporating only effect sizes we were able to compute precisely (see above), and sensitivity analyses were then conducted employing the full sample of both precise and approximated effect sizes to ensure the robustness of results (see below for descriptives). To test for publication bias, Eggers test of the intercept (43) and the Trim and Fill method (44) were conducted at the level of the sample.
Results
After 3,969 records were scanned (see Figure 1), the search process yielded 127 effect sizes drawn from 60 independent randomized trials including a total of 2,149 participants. Of these, 105 effect sizes (k=49 trials) were computed precisely based on information provided within reports or via author contacts and thus were the focus of primary analyses below (see data analytic plan). Within this primary sample, alcohol doses employed varied from .026%BAC (~1–2 standard drinks/1 hour) to .12% (~6 drinks), with an average dose of .07% (~3–4 drinks). The most frequently assessed component was the P3b (Neffects=52). Although not assessed as frequently, all other components nonetheless were assessed in multiple studies, with samples more than sufficient for meta-analysis (45): N2b (Neffects=15), N2c (Neffects=14), MMN (Neffects=14), and ERN (Neffects=10). Approximately 6% of effects were drawn from unpublished reports. No study was assessed as having high risk of bias. See Table 2 for study-level descriptives and the complete dataset used in analysis (Table S2).
Across all alcohol doses and component types, alcohol consumption significantly reduced the amplitude of ERPs, g=−.34, 95% CI[−.43, −.26]. There was variability in the size of this effect, σ2L2, = .05, p=.002; σ2L3=.03, p=.20. Inspection of I2 values indicated that 37.4% of variance in effect sizes was within samples, whereas 20.4% of variance was between samples (the remaining 42.2% of variance was attributable to sampling error).
Moderator analyses revealed that the extent to which alcohol reduced the magnitude of ERP amplitude varied significantly depending on the specific component, F(4, 100)=5.25, p<.001. Alcohol’s effects on the magnitude of the ERN was statistically significant and moderate in magnitude, g=−.56, 95% CI[−.79, −.33]. Alcohol’s effects on P3b, g=−.40, 95% CI[−.50, −.29] and MMN, g=−.44, 95% CI[−.66, −.22], were statistically significant and small to moderate in magnitude. Finally, alcohol’s impact on the N2c was small in magnitude, g=−.24, 95% CI[−.45, −.02], and alcohol’s effect on the N2b was trivial and non-significant, g=−.02, 95% CI[−.21, .17]. Follow-up contrasts indicated that the effect of alcohol on the N2b was significantly smaller than its effects on the ERN, MMN, and P3b, p’s≤005, but did not differ significantly from its effects on the N2c, p=.145. Results remained unchanged in analyses that separated FRN from ERN components, and in analyses parsing the control N2b, the novelty N2b, as well as task-specific (flanker and go/no-go) specific N2b effects (see eTable 1). See Figure 2 for a forest plot of study-level effects and Figure 3 for a plot of aggregate effects across components.
Alcohol’s tendency to reduce ERP amplitude was also significantly impacted by alcohol dose, with larger negative effects of alcohol emerging at larger doses, b=−4.43, p=.005. Follow-up analyses indicated that these dose effects were variable dependent on component(s). Specifically, when examined among those components for which a moderate or small to moderate overall effect of alcohol emerged (i.e., P3b, ERN, and MMN) there was a significant effect of alcohol dose, such that higher doses were associated with greater amplitude-dampening effects of alcohol, b=−5.46, 95% CI[−8.42, −2.51]. Follow-up contrasts indicated that alcohol’s effects on these components emerged as small but significant at doses as low as .026% BAC, g=−.18, 95% CI[−.34, −.02] and moderate/large in magnitude for doses as high as .12% g=−.69, 95% CI[−.87, −.51] (doses selected as representing minimum and maximum alcohol doses in this sample of studies). In contrast, when examined among components for which a small or trivial effect of alcohol emerged (N2b and N2c), there was no significant effect of alcohol dose—i.e., higher alcohol doses did not produce significantly larger alcohol effects, b=−2.36, 95% CI[−8.31, 3.59]. No effects of participant characteristics (i.e., age and gender composition of the sample) reached significance, nor did effects emerge for Risk of Bias level. See Table 3.
Sensitivity Analysis with Full Sample
When these primary analyses were replicated with the full sample of 127 effect sizes, including both precise and approximated effects (see above), the overall average effect of alcohol tended to be slightly smaller (see Table 3)—unsurprising given the overrepresentation of null effects in approximated effects as well as the conservative methods chosen for effect size approximation (38). However, overall significance level, as well as effects of moderator analyses, remained unchanged in this full sample.
Publication Bias
Egger’s test of the intercept did not provide evidence of significant publication bias either within the primary precise sample (k=49), b=−.80, 95%CI[−1.90, .30], or within the full sample (k=60), b=−.13, 95%CI[−1.01, .74]. The Trim and Fill method produced an imputed point estimate of g= −.25, 95%CI[−.34, −.16] for the precise sample, and an estimate of g=−.31 95%CI[−.37, −.24] for the full sample. Within neither sample did effect sizes from unpublished studies differ significantly from published studies (see Table 3). Taken as a whole, these tests indicate that publication bias was unlikely to have had a substantial impact on our findings. A complete set of funnel plots, subdivided by component type, are presented in the supplement (Figure s1).
Discussion
The current review synthesized results of over four decades of research, spanning 60 independent randomized controlled trials with a combined sample size of 2,149 participants. Results indicated that alcohol’s effects varied significantly across neural systems, with alcohol exerting significant dampening effects on ERP components linked with attention (P3b), automatic auditory processing (MMN), and performance monitoring (ERN/FRN). These effects were moderated by alcohol dose, emerging as small but significant at doses as low as .026% BAC and increasing to moderate/large in magnitude at .12%. In contrast, irrespective of dose, no effects of alcohol emerged for components linked to executive control (N2b) and only small effects were observed for those linked with stimulus classification (N2c).
Various frameworks have been proposed to explain alcohol’s effects on neural systems. One longstanding body of work points to alcohol as a “dirty drug,” with far-reaching CNS-depressant properties spanning neurotransmitter systems and processing domains (26–28,46). Such a framework might predict potent and largely invariant effects of alcohol across neural systems (26). In contrast, an alternative framework posits that alcohol’s effects are predominantly in the realm of controlled functioning, predicting that alcohol’s effects will be seen mainly in the domain of controlled processes while leaving automatic processes relatively intact (47–49). Of note, results of this review provide unqualified support for neither of these extant frameworks, but rather provide insights beyond them. A moderate and significant effect of alcohol was observed in dampening the amplitude of the MMN—an auditory component so grounded in automatic processes that it is routinely observed even among sleeping infants (50)—while no significant effects of alcohol emerged for the N2b—a component linked with a cluster of controlled executive functions (33). One possible explanation for this pattern of results is that alcohol does not uniformly impair executive control per se but rather appears to impair motivational (ERN) and attentional processes (P3b) necessary for the maintenance and/or recovery of control (25,51). Thus, results build on extant models, indicating that alcohol’s effects are neither universal across domains of processing nor limited exclusively to the controlled realm, instead revealing targeted effects of alcohol on specific neural systems spanning domains from automatic to controlled.
Regarding the specific targeted alcohol effects identified within this review, these findings might serve to further build our understanding of acute alcohol-related impairment as well as alcohol disorder risk. Alcohol is the leading cause of premature injury and death among individuals 15–49 worldwide (1), with alcohol-related traffic accidents in the US alone taking over 10,000 lives each year (5). By revealing effects of alcohol on neural circuits involved in attention (P3b) and performance monitoring (ERN)—effects that emerged as significant even at low alcohol doses—results of this review move towards isolating neural mechanisms that might underlie alcohol-related behavioral impairment and risk-taking behaviors. Effects for the MMN, a component thought to represent the pre-conscious precursor to attention switching, indicate that alcohol’s effects on processes relevant for behavioral output extends to the automatic, attention-independent processing of stimulus features. Beyond acute alcohol effects on behavior, findings might also inform our understanding of factors underlying the development of disordered drinking. Studies have revealed P3b amplitude as a potential endophenotype for alcohol use disorder risk (52), and an understanding of acute alcohol P3b effects could help elucidate causal factors in such pathways (53). The ERN has also been linked to experiences of anxiety/negative affect (54,55) and, when considered in light of research linking problematic drinking to coping motives (10), results might further speak to mechanisms underlying reinforcing effects of consuming alcohol and the etiology of disordered drinking (12).
Independent of implications for the understanding of alcohol, results of this review also have implications for the understanding of neural systems more broadly. Various theories have been proposed for understanding the role of the ERN and N2b components in controlled detection of conflict and motor inhibition (33,35,56,57). One more prominent theory posits that the N2b and ERN are not functionally differentiable but in fact index the same underlying conflict monitoring process (56). Here, in a large aggregate sample well powered to detect small effects, we reveal a non-significant effect of alcohol on N2b whereas, in contrast, the ERN effect was among the largest for components examined. By indicating distinct effects of alcohol on ERN and N2b, results provide support for theories positing differential functional significance for the N2b and ERN (34).
Limitations of this study should be noted. First, the current review, which focused primarily on main effects of alcohol, was designed only to explore individual difference moderators reported across a sizable proportion of studies (e.g., gender). A range of other individual difference factors have been explored as moderators of alcohol’s effects (e.g., genetic profile, family history of AUD, etc.), and main effects reported here do not preclude the possibility for additional potential moderators. Second, we did not have access to participant-level data, and so our examination of participant-level moderators was conducted at the level of the sample, thus limiting our power. Relatedly, relatively few studies targeted older participant samples, a factor that constrained our power to detect moderating effects of age and may further have implications for the generalizability of results. Third, although doses of alcohol administered in studies reviewed here were “high” by most standards (highest dose >.1% BAC), these alcohol doses may still fall short of doses ingested by some chronic heavy drinkers. Fourth, alcohol’s pharmacological effects can differ depending on an individual’s position on the BAC curve (e.g., ascending limb, descending limb, or BAC peak), and the current review did not account for time elapsed following beverage intake. Future research might explore the extent to which alcohol’s impact on various ERPs differ depending on BAC limb. Finally, in the current review, we did not index all ERP components, or even all facets of ERP components, but rather focused on components of functional significance for understanding alcohol’s effects that have been adequately represented in the extant literature. Future empirical research examining additional components targeting other neural functions would be informative.
In summary, this report represents what is to our knowledge the first quantitative synthesis of alcohol’s effects on the human brain. Results help move towards the identification of neural systems underlying alcohol-related cognitive/behavioral impairments as well as factors reinforcing disordered drinking. Findings further offer insights relevant to the theoretical understanding of alcohol’s neural effects, as well as the understanding of neural systems more broadly, highlighting human brain electrophysiology as a valuable tool for addiction science.
Supplementary Material