Introduction
The prevalence of cannabis use in the United States has increased in recent years due to changing attitudes and evolving cannabis policies (Key Substance Use and Mental Health Indicators in the United States: Results from the National Survey Drug Use and Health, 2022). According to the 2021 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) (Key Substance Use and Mental Health Indicators in the United States: Results from the National Survey Drug Use and Health, 2022), approximately 36.4 million individuals aged 12 or older reported using cannabis in the past month, representing ~13% of the U.S. population. This is an increase from previous years (2015 National Survey on Drug Use and Health, 2016), highlighting the need to determine how cannabis use may affect cognitive and motor functions important for daily living.
The primary psychoactive ingredient in cannabis, delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), binds to cannabinoid 1 (CB1) receptors that are ubiquitous in brain regions that underlie cognitive and psychomotor function. Much of the existing literature focusing on how THC affects cognitive performance converge on the notion that exposure to THC leads to impaired performance on several cognitive domains, but most consistently in memory, attention and executive functioning (Bourque & Potvin, 2021; Crean, Crane, & Mason, 2011; Ford, Hayley, Downey, & Parrott, 2017; Ganzer, Bröning, Kraft, Sack, & Thomasius, 2016; Prashad & Filbey, 2017), especially during the acute intoxication phase (Bourque & Potvin, 2021; Dellazizzo, Potvin, Giguère, & Dumais, 2022).
To date, whether these deficits remit following cessation of use is not yet fully understood given inconsistencies in the current literature, which are partly due to methodological variabilities such as population sample (e.g., severity of use), selection of cognitive sub-domains and length of abstinence. During short-term abstinence (~7 days), several studies (Bolbecker et al., 2018; Pope, Gruber, Hudson, Huestis, & Yurgelun-Todd, 2001; Schuster et al., 2018) including a meta-analysis of 38 studies (Ganzer et al., 2016) have reported observable cognitive impairments in adults with cannabis use. However, another meta-analysis in adults with chronic cannabis use showed a negative association between length of abstinence and cognitive effect sizes; furthermore, the authors reported that studies with abstinence beyond 72 hours had small, nonsignificant effect sizes (Scott et al., 2018). Overall, findings on the short-term, residual effects of cannabis use are mixed, but generally suggest that most cognitive deficits associated with cannabis use begin to remit after short-term (3-7 days) abstinence.
Similarly, the few studies that have examined the enduring (i.e., >28 days of abstinence) cognitive effects of cannabis use have also led to mixed results. For instance, mild to moderate cognitive deficits in multiple cognitive domains were reported in those with >25 days of cannabis abstinence in a meta-analysis by Lovell et al. (2020). On the other hand, an earlier meta-analysis found only small effect sizes of cannabis on cognitive deficits >25 days of abstinence (Schreiner & Dunn, 2012). This is in line with studies showing diminishing effects of cannabis on cognition with sustained abstinence (Ganzer et al., 2016; Kroon, Kuhns, & Cousijn, 2021; Scott et al., 2018) suggesting inconclusive evidence for enduring cognitive deficits in adults with cannabis use (Kroon et al., 2021). An empirical investigation of long-term cannabis abstinence vs. non-abstinence found that those with long-term abstinence (i.e., 3 months to 6 years of abstinence) had improvements in selective attention deficits such that their performance was better than those who were not abstinent. However, cognitive performance of those with long-term abstinence was poorer than non-using controls (Solowij, 1995).
Much of the literature to date has focused on the persistence of cannabis effects on cognition. As opposed to cognitive function, our understanding of the effects of cannabis use on motor function is still developing. Studies show strong evidence of acute effects of cannabis on psychomotor function where motor deficits as a result of cannabis use manifest as slower reaction times (RT) and poorer motor control in motor response inhibition tasks that improve during early abstinence (Block, Farinpour, & Braverman, 1992; Hunault et al., 2009; McDonald, Schleifer, Richards, & de Wit, 2003; Ramaekers et al., 2006; Wilson, Ellinwood, Mathew, & Johnson, 1994). The few existing investigations of persistence of psychomotor impairment have reported deficits during short-term (~12 hours) (King et al., 2011) and long-term abstinence (~28 days) (Bolla, Brown, Eldreth, Tate, & Cadet, 2002; Winward, Hanson, Tapert, & Brown, 2014). Indeed, compared to other functions, a review by Ganzer et al. (2016) found that impaired psychomotor function is among the most persistent deficit associated with cannabis use. Unlike cognition, however, the long-term effects of cannabis use on motor function beyond 28 days abstinence have not yet been examined.
In sum, despite the existing literature showing negative impacts of cannabis use on cognitive and psychomotor function, our understanding of whether these effects persist following long-term (i.e., >1 month) cessation of use are limited by the fact that studies to date have focused primarily on short-term abstinence. Further, cannabis’ neurotoxic effects may be subtle; therefore, examinations of adults with cannabis use with wide-ranging use severity may minimize observable effects. In this study, we examined both cognitive and psychomotor function using NIH Toolbox cognitive and motor batteries in (1) adults with chronic, heavy cannabis use during unrestricted use and after three days of abstinence, (2) adults with chronic, heavy cannabis use with long-term abstinence >3 months and (3) non-using controls.
Methods
All procedures were approved by the University of Texas at Dallas Institutional Review Board. We report how we determined our sample size, all data exclusions, all manipulations, and all measures in the study. Materials and analysis code for this study are available by emailing the corresponding author. Power analyses were performed using G*Power version 3.1 with α = .05. The results indicated that the required sample size to achieve 80% power for detecting a medium effect size (f2 = 0.15) was N = 77 in a multiple regression analysis (Faul, Erdfelder, Lang, & Buchner, 2007).
Participants
Participants were recruited from the general community using digital and print advertisements to take part in a study to examine the effects of cannabis use on cognition and psychomotor performance. The inclusion criteria for all participants were: (1) aged 18-30 years, (2) proficient in English, (3) right-handed, and (4) able to provide informed consent. Exclusion criteria were: (1) history of brain injury or neurological diagnoses (including loss of consciousness >6 minutes in the past 6 months), (2) psychiatric or neurological diagnosis, except anxiety or depression, (3) substance use disorder (other than cannabis use disorder in the cannabis using group) in the past year and/or other substance use within the last 90 days, (4) currently taking antipsychotics (e.g., neuroleptics, anticonvulsants), (5) pregnant, and (6) EEG contraindications (the EEG component of the study will be described in a separate report).
Participants were categorized into (1) adults with current cannabis use (CU), (2) adults with former cannabis use (FU), and (3) non-using controls (CON). FU were described as having at least 1,600 lifetime uses of cannabis, less than three separate cannabis use occasions within the last three months, and no use in the past 30 days. CU were required to have at least 2,500 lifetime uses, and an average weekly usage of 5 or more days per week (>65 of the past 90 days) based on TimeLine Follow Back (TLFB) interview (Sobell, Sobell, & VanderSpek, 1979). CON were defined as those with less than seven separate occasions of cannabis use in their lifetime.
Based on these criteria, a total of 128 participants were included in this study comprising of 39 CU, 28 FU, and 61 CON. Of these, 8 CU, 5 FU, and 3 CON did not complete the NIH Toolbox and were excluded from subsequent analyses. Thus, the final sample for our analyses included 31 CU, 23 FU, and 58 CON (Total N=112; see Table 1). For within-group analyses comparing CU during unrestricted use (UNR) to CU during restricted use (RES), only those who completed both sessions were included resulting in 31 CU (see Table 2).
Study Procedure
FU and CON completed one study visit, whereas CU were asked to complete one experimental visit during unrestricted cannabis use (UNR) and one experimental visit after 3 days of abstinence (RES). These experimental visits were scheduled three days apart with order of abstinence requirements counterbalanced across participants such that 50% of CU were abstinent for their first experimental visit, while 50% of CU were abstinent during their second experimental visit. This controlled for potential order or practice effects in CU. To verify 3-day abstinence compliance, urine samples were collected from CU during both unrestricted and abstinent/restricted visits to confirm a decrease in cannabis use via creatinine-normalized 11-nor-9-carboxy-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol urine concentrations (THC/Cr) (Quest Diagnostics Lab). Participants in all groups completed a multi-drug test panel. FU and CON who tested positive for THC were excluded. All participants who tested positive for substances other than THC were also excluded.
Cannabis use measures
We used THC/Cr metabolite level as an indicator of current cannabis use. Additionally, we collected information on cannabis potency using the recreational cannabis questionnaire (R-CUE) (Troup, Andrzejewski, Braunwalder, & Torrence, 2016) where participants self-reported potency of their cannabis products qualitatively (from “Very Mild” to “Very Strong”) and quantitatively (from “0-5%” THC to “More than 30%”). We used past 90-day use collected using the Timeline Followback (TLFB), as well as estimates of total lifetime use. Finally, we measured withdrawal symptoms using the Marijuana Withdrawal Checklist (MWC) (Budney, Novy, & Hughes, 1999).
Cognitive assessments
We used the NIH Toolbox – Cognition Battery (NIHTB-CB) (Weintraub et al., 2013) to measure (1) receptive language via Picture Vocabulary Test, (2) expressive language via Oral Reading Recognition Test, (3) working memory via List Sorting Working Memory Task, (4) processing speed via Pattern Comparison Processing Speed Test and Oral Symbol Digit Test, (5) episodic memory via Picture Sequence Memory Test, (6) inhibitory control and selective attention via Flanker Inhibitory Control and Attention Test, (7) cognitive flexibility and attention using the Dimensional Change Card Sort Test, and (8) verbal learning and memory via Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test.
Psychomotor assessments
The NIH Toolbox - Motor Battery (NIHTB-MB)(Reuben et al., 2013) was used to evaluate gross and fine motor function in the participants. The 2-Minute Walk Endurance Test measured endurance, the 4-Meter Walk Gait Speed Test measured locomotion, the Standing Balance Test measured balance, the 9-Hole Pegboard Dexterity Test measured dexterity, and the Grip Strength Test measured grip strength.
Statistical Model
We used a general linear mixed model to assess mean differences between the groups. The model for each observed NIH toolbox measure y from the lth subject can be written in two parts, one that specifies the structure for independent groups ykl=μ+Gk+δkl, where k={CON,FU,CU} as defined above for the group effect, G, and one that specifies the structure for adults with current cannabis use who have been randomized into restricted- and unrestricted-use sequences in a crossover design yijkl=μ+Si+δil+Pj+Gk+εijkl where k={restricteduse,unrestricteduse} as defined above for the group effect, G. In the latter structure j is either the order {restricted,unrestricted} or {unrestricted,restricted} for the sequence effect, S, and j={Time1} or {Time2} for the period effect, P.
In addition to the between-subject variance σδ2 of the random error term δil, the repeated measure error term εijkl has variance σε2. Model parameters were estimated by maximum likelihood, or, in the case of random terms, variances were estimated by restricted maximum likelihood.
Inference was based on 3 degree-of-freedom F-statistics quantifying the differential effects of Gk on each NIH toolbox measure. For those Fobs>F1−α(α−.1), we considered t-contrasts from tests of Gk=Gk′. UNR and RES were tested against CON; FU against CU; and RES against UNR.
Test of moderators: Cannabis withdrawal, potency, and lifetime use
Secondary analyses were performed to determine the impact of cannabis use measures on cognitive and psychomotor performance differences between groups. Pearson’s correlation analyses were performed between NIH Toolbox cognitive and motor test scores in UNR, RES and FU and withdrawal symptoms, self-reported cannabis potency, lifetime use and THC/Cr ratio.
Results
Sample characteristics
Participant characteristics are summarized in Table 1. There were statistically significant differences in sex, educational attainment, and household income across groups (p<.05). No significant differences in sex between groups were found. These variables were added to the analyses as covariates of no interest. Though annual household income significantly varied between CON, FU, and CU, income and educational attainment are both measures of socioeconomic status. To avoid overcontrolling, we only selected education as a covariate.
Past 90-day cannabis use was assessed using the Timeline Followback (TLFB). CU reported past 90-day usage ranging from 73 to 90 days (M = 86.90, SD = 4.22), while FU past 90-day usage ranged from 0 to 2 occasions (M = 0.30, SD = 0.64).
Group effect of cannabis on cognitive function
Linear mixed models revealed significant group effects on NIH Toolbox-Cognitive measures (see Figure 1 and Table 3). For within-group analyses comparing CU during unrestricted use (UNR) to CU during restricted use (RES), only those who completed both sessions were included, resulting in 31 CU (see Table 2). Seventeen participants had missing data for at least one NIH Toolbox task, 10 of whom were only missing data from a single task. All seventeen of these participants were included in the analysis.
There was a significant group effect on the Oral Reading Recognition Test (F = 3.392; p = .025). Post-hoc t-contrasts showed that CON performed significantly better than UNR, t(127.3) = −2.822, p = .006. There was also a significant group effect on the Picture Sequence Memory Test (F = 4.027; p = .012). Post-hoc t-contrasts showed that CON performed significantly better than UNR, t(129.1) = −2.381, p = .019, as well as RES, t(129.9) = −3.341, p < .001. Additionally, while there were not significant group effects on the Flanker Inhibitory Control Test, post-hoc t-tests found that CON performed significantly better than UNR, t(128.3) = −2.154, p = .033, and RES t(130.4) = −2.268, p = .025. There were no other significant group effects on NIH Cognitive Toolbox tests.
Group effect of cannabis on psychomotor function
Linear mixed models revealed significant group effects in NIH Toolbox Motor fully corrected T-scores (see Figure 2 and Table 4). On the Grip Strength Test, significant effects of group were found on both the dominant (F = 6.634; p <.001) and nondominant hands (F = 4.930; p = .005). Post-hoc t-contrasts revealed that, when using the dominant hand, CON performed significantly worse than FU (t(108.8) = 6.634, p <.001), RES (t(122.7) = 3.520, p <.001) and UNR (t(1149.0) = 3.489, p <.001). When using the nondominant hand, CON also performed significantly worse than FU (t(106.4) = 3.438, p<.001), RES (t(120.4) = 2.540, p = .012) UNR (t(118.2) = 2.566, p = .012.Additionally, trend-level effects of group were found on the 9-Hole Pegboard Test with the nondominant hand (F = 2.326, p = .086) .Post-hoc t-contrasts showed RES performed better than UNR on the 9-Hole Pegboard Test with the nondominant hand (t(23.3) = −2.575, p = .017), and CON performed significantly better than RES on the Standing Balance Test (t(111.5) = -−2.072, p = .041).
Moderators of effects of cannabis on cognition and psychomotor performance
We performed Pearson’s correlations to examine the effects of withdrawal symptoms and cannabis potency and estimated lifetime occasions on cognitive and motor performance. MWC scores were not significantly correlated with NIH cognitive or motor toolbox scores with significant group differences or effects. Quantitative and qualitative cannabis potency were significantly correlated with each other, but not with cognitive or motor test scores. Total lifetime use was not significantly correlated with NIH Toolbox cognitive and motor performance for either group of adults with current or former cannabis use.
Manipulation Check
To test confounding effects of cannabis withdrawal or THC/Cr (Table 2) on the observed differences in the 9-hole Pegboard test performance (nondominant hand) between UNR and RES, we tested a linear mixed model with MWC scores and THC/Cr ratio as covariates. A significant group effect remained (F = 8.868, p = .007) indicating the effect of short-term abstinence on manual dexterity are above and beyond the effects of withdrawal and cannabis metabolites.
Discussion
This study adds to the broad understanding of how widely reported acute effects of cannabis on cognitive and psychomotor function may remit following short- and long-term cessation of use. In the present study, both residual and enduring effects were examined in cognition and psychomotor functions. Our findings support the current literature demonstrating acute and residual effects of cannabis in cognition. Acute effects of cannabis emerged during Oral Reading Recognition and Picture Sequence Memory Tests. Residual effects were observed during the Picture Sequence Memory Test. Additionally, while the mixed model did not reveal a significant group effect on the Flanker Inhibitory Control Test, post-hoc t-tests found that CON performed significantly better than UNR and RES, demonstrating both acute and residual effects. In terms of psychomotor function, only grip strength had significant group effects in both dominant and nondominant hands such that CON had poorer performance than FU, UNR and RES. There were trend-level group effects on the 9 Hole Pegboard test with the nondominant hand, with RES performing significantly better than UNR. In addition, RES performed significantly worse than CON on the Standing Balance Test. Overall, these results indicate multiple residual deficits as a result of heavy cannabis use on cognitive and motor performance, but do not indicate enduring deficits following long-term cannabis abstinence.
Given that FU did not significantly differ from CON on any cognitive or motor task other than the Grip Strength Test, our findings do not indicate the presence of enduring effects of cannabis use beyond one month. Although these findings run counter to reported enduring effects of cannabis in attention and some executive functions that persist after prolonged abstinence (Broyd, van Hell, Beale, Yücel, & Solowij, 2016; Crean et al., 2011; Ganzer et al., 2016), our findings are concordant with emerging literature demonstrating remission of cannabis effects on cognition and psychomotor function following abstinence >1 month (Kroon et al., 2021; Lyons et al., 2004; Schreiner & Dunn, 2012). Among the first studies to directly examine adults with former cannabis use, Pope et al. (2001) found significant cognitive differences in adults with current cannabis use at 0, 1 and 7 days of abstinence, but no significant differences between adults with cannabis use after 28 days of abstinence and controls. In a longitudinal study spanning eight years, another study found that adults with former regular cannabis use showed better cognitive function than adults with current regular cannabis use, suggesting that cannabis impairing effects resolve following long-term abstinence (Tait, Mackinnon, & Christensen, 2011). Similarly, Jacobus et al. (2015) demonstrated that impairment in cognitive function in adults with cannabis use resolve with reduction in overall cannabis consumption. Findings from Jacobus et al. (2015) suggest a dose-dependent effect in remission; therefore, it is possible that that lack of difference between FU and CON is due to the prolonged duration of abstinence in our FU sample, which was approximately 21 months. Thus, any potential remission from impairment would be greater with prolonged duration of abstinence. This supports the notion that despite THC’s large burden on the central nervous system (CNS) during acute intoxication, enduring burden on CNS is subtle after prolonged abstinence.
The cognitive deficits observed during non-abstinence as well as short-term abstinence when compared to controls are consistent with the literature on cannabis use and cognitive performance (Pope et al., 2001; Schreiner & Dunn, 2012; Solowij et al., 2002). The significant group effect on the Picture Sequence Memory Test, as well as the significant post-hoc t-test results on this test and the Flanker Inhibitory Attention and Control Test, indicate deficits in episodic memory and executive function in adults with heavy cannabis use during unrestricted use and short-term abstinence, Multiple recent reviews have concluded that there is sufficient evidence to support some residual cognitive deficits in these areas in adults with cannabis use, though they note that these deficits appear to be mild (Bourque & Potvin, 2021; Kroon et al., 2021). The significant group effect and post-hoc t-test results on the Oral Reading Recognition Test indicate deficits in adults with heavy cannabis use in crystallized reading ability during unrestricted use, but not short-term or long-term abstinence. This result was unexpected, and there does not appear to be evidence of deficits in crystallized knowledge or reading ability throughout the literature. It is possible this result is due to the lower average years of education in CU as compared to the other groups, as there were significant differences between groups in education. It should be noted, however, that the fully-corrected t-scores generated by the NIH Toolbox do account for differences education, so these differences should have been controlled for in our analysis.
In general, very few studies have examined cognition in adults with cannabis use using the NIH cognitive toolbox. Using the NIH Toolbox - Cognition Battery, Thayer et al. (2019) also found no significant difference between older (mean age = 66) adults with cannabis use compared to controls. Those who have found significant effects using NIH Toolbox related to cannabis use have included significantly large sample sizes – i.e., 1,121 participants from the Human Connectome Project (Petker et al., 2019). In this study by Petker et al. (2019), an association was found between having a positive THC urine drug screen (i.e., more than 50 nanograms per milliliter) and performance on the Picture Sequence Memory Test and Pattern Comparison Processing Speed Test. No other associations emerged despite the large sample size between other cannabis use measures (total number of lifetime uses, cannabis use disorder and age at first use) and cognitive tests from NIH Toolbox.
Our findings showed significant group effects on the Grip Strength test such that all adults with current cannabis use as well as those with former cannabis use had greater strength than controls. This finding is unexpected given that previous findings on grip strength suggest decreased performance with cannabis use (Güçlü, Tuğay, Özden, Keşli, & Noyan, 2023). This unexpected difference appears to be due to a significant deficit in CON performance such that the group mean is one standard deviation below the population mean on both tests, while the group means for UNR, RES, and FU are within the population means. This difference could not be explained by the significant demographic differences between the groups (age, sex, ethnicity and education) given that these differences were found using age- and gender-normalized t-scores. Additionally, these group differences persisted after the removal of potential outliers. There may be other factors that we have not accounted for that should be considered in future studies, such as caffeine intake, occupational differences, unaccounted physical factors, mood, social expectations, etc.
We found mixed effects of short-term abstinence on motor performance. During restricted use, adults with cannabis use performed significantly worse than controls on the Standing Balance Test. These findings contradict previous findings on standing balance tasks showing poorer performance in adults with current cannabis use compared to controls (Bolbecker et al., 2018; Workman, Fietsam, Sosnoff, & Rudroff, 2021). However, no study to date has examined the residual effects of cannabis in Standing Balance Test performance. Our results indicate a decline in standing balance ability during short-term cannabis withdrawal that does not persist through long-term abstinence. We also found that adults with cannabis use performed significantly better during restricted use compared to unrestrid use on the 9-Hole Pegboard Test with the nondominant hand. The current literature on the effects of cannabis use on manual dexterity are inconsistent, with multiple studies reporting adults with current cannabis use perform significantly worse than controls on the pegboard tasks (Bolla et al., 2002; Güçlü et al., 2023; King et al., 2011), but others reporting no significant difference (Petker et al., 2019). Our results do not suggest a significant difference in psychomotor dexterity between adults with cannabis use and controls, but they do suggest an increase in individual psychomotor dexterity during short-term cannabis abstinence. No study has examined psychomotor dexterity in relation to cannabis abstinence, and future studies should are needed to further evaluate the effects of cannabis abstinence on motor performance.
It is important to note that the effects of cannabis can be dose dependent (Bolla et al., 2002; Zamberletti & Rubino, 2022). Lower doses may result in milder impairments, while higher doses or the use of more potent cannabis products may lead to more pronounced dysfunction. Our findings did not find significant correlations between THC/Cr metabolite levels or self-reported potency and cognitive or psychomotor performance. This lack of association between cannabis dose and cognitive and motor function mirrors findings from other studies (Declues, Perez, & Figueroa, 2016; Hartman & Huestis, 2013). For example, Hitchock et al. (2021) did not find correlations between motor performance (limb extension, balance, finger tapping) and THC plasma levels during acute intoxication. However, we acknowledge that this absence of association could be due to a ceiling effect in our sample of adults with chronic heavy cannabis use. Absence of association between cannabis use variables and NIH cognitive and motor Toolbox performance highlights the need for more precise and objective measures of cannabis use.
Limitations and Conclusions
This study adds to the broader understanding of how widely reported acute effects of cannabis on cognitive and psychomotor function may remit following short- and long-term cessation of use. Our findings indicate residual effects of cannabis on cognitive and motor performance, but do not indicate enduring effects after cessation of use. Given some trend-level differences that emerged in our findings, it is possible that effects of cannabis are subtle. Thus, larger sample sizes or more sensitive neuropsychological tests are needed for these effects to be detected. This further suggests that direct measures of brain activity, e.g., EEG, may be needed. Although we used a hybrid model with adults with cannabis use during both unrestricted and restricted use, longitudinal, within-group study designs with greater length of abstinence are needed to minimize the effects of individual variability. Although challenging to conduct especially with longer timeframes, monitoring abstinence beyond four weeks would also provide greater assurance on abstinence that primarily rely on self-report. Although we collected THC/Cr metabolite levels in urine, this index is limited to exposure within ~four weeks. Future studies should consider other tests of circulating THC (e.g., hair, blood, etc.).
To conclude, these findings demonstrate the broad benefits of cannabis abstinence in the short and long-term on CNS function. Future studies are needed to evaluate whether these effects are also observable with use reduction as opposed to abstinence. With the changes in public policy and perception regarding cannabis use, it is critical to address the effects of cannabis use on cognition for the determination of impact on public health as well as identification of areas for rehabilitation.